AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
Arizona
Driver License
Manual
azdot.gov/mvd

-- 1 of 57 --

Mike Cryderman
Acting Division Director
Motor Vehicle Division
Dear Arizona motorists:
The Arizona Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle Division (ADOT MVD) is pleased
to provide this guide to Arizona traffic laws and information for obtaining a driver license or
identification card. This manual also provides essential safety information for both new and
experienced Arizona drivers.
ADOT MVD delivers services to millions of Arizona motorists each year. In line with the
Division’s vision of getting Arizona “out of the line and safely on the road” we are continuously
improving processes to provide swift and efficient service. In addition to coming into an office,
ADOT MVD offers alternative methods for Arizonans to access services. For example, two thirds
of all transactions, including common ones like registration renewals, sold notices, title
transfers, ordering a replacement license, updating insurance information, ordering a motor
vehicle record, and more can be done online at AZMVDNow.gov. We also encourage Arizona
drivers to take advantage of the more than 160 privately operated Authorized Third Party
locations to serve you across the state. Several of these locations offer both Title and
Registration and driver license transactions! Find a location convenient for you at azdot.gov/
mvdlocations.
We look forward to providing you with outstanding customer service and a safe driving
experience while we continue our mission of “moving Arizona’s citizens, economy and
infrastructure by getting safe drivers and vehicles on the road.”
Sincerely,
azdot.gov
KATIE HOBBS
GOVERNOR
JENNIFER TOTH
DIRECTOR

-- 2 of 57 --

About This Manual
This manual is designed to help you
obtain a driver license or an
instruction permit by explaining the
Arizona motor vehicle laws without
using technical language. Details of the
motor vehicle laws can be found in
Arizona Revised Statutes at azleg.gov
under Title 28 “Transportation” which
offers the most up to date and accurate
information.
MVD is providing this manual
electronically to help insure you
have the most up-to-date
information.
If you are applying for a motorcycle
license, you will need to study the
Motorcycle Operator Manual in addition
to this manual. If you are applying for a
Commercial Driver License, please refer
to the Commercial Driver License
Manual. All manuals are available
online at azdot.gov/mvd.
Questions or Comments?
Phoenix 602.255.0072
Tucson 520.629.9808
Elsewhere in Arizona 1.800.251.5866
TDD 602.712.3222
All Contents ©2026 Arizona Department of Transportation Revised January 2026
Office Locations and Hours
AZMVDNow.gov
Third Party Services Driver
Education Services Traffic
Survival School Program
Vehicle Inspections
Fees at MVD Offices
5
6
7
10
13
16
Name and Address Changes
Military Personnel Information
Veteran Designation
Motor Vehicle Records
Arizona's Driver License
Classes of Licenses
Identification (ID) Card
Section 1
BEFORE YOU DRIVE
Section 2
SAFE DRIVING PRACTICES
Section 3
ROADWAY AND VEHICLE
KNOWLEDGE
Section 4
SHARING THE ROAD WITH
OTHER VEHICLES
Section 5
ACTIVELY AVOIDING CRASHES
Section 6
HANDLING EMERGENCIES
Section 7
LAW ENFORCEMENT
4
18
26
40
42
53
56
Table of Contents

-- 3 of 57 --

▪ Vehicle Registration Renewal
▪ Permanent Placard Renewal
▪ Replacement Driver License/ID
▪ Permit Test @ Home
▪ Emissions/Registration Check
▪ Title Viewer
▪ Driver License Reinstatement
▪ Insurance Update and Vehicle
Reinstatement
▪ MVD Office Appointments
▪ Address/Email Change
▪ 30-Day General Use Permit
▪ Duplicate Vehicle Registration
▪ Fleet Registration Renewal
▪ Personalized/Specialty Plates
▪ Restricted Use 3-Day Permit
▪ Vehicle Sold Notice
▪ View Plate Credit
▪ Plate Refund
▪ Voter Registration
Office Locations and Hours
Most MVD offices provide both driver license
and title and registration services. For a list
of MVD offices, services and hours of
operation, visit azdot.gov/mvd.
AZMVDNow.gov
It’s fast, convenient, secure, offers more than
20 online services, and is continuously
expanding. AZMVDNow.gov is
MVD’s authorized service website that
allows our customers to conduct a
variety of motor vehicle and driver license
transactions online.
AZMVDNow.gov now offers online
appointments that allow our customers to
choose the best time to visit a local
MVD office and avoid waiting in line when:
▪ Applying for a Travel ID
▪ Taking a road test
▪ Renewing a Driver License, CDL or ID
▪ Instruction Permit
▪ Additional Services
Services available at AZMVDNow.gov
4
▪ Tab Replacement
▪ De-insured Certificate
▪ Organ Donor Registration
▪ Motor Vehicle Record – Title and
Registration or Driver Record
▪ Vehicle Fee Recap
▪ Insurance Verification
▪ Off Highway Vehicle Decal
▪ Motor Vehicle Lien Inquiry
▪ And more!
Third Party Services
Third party providers are authorized to offer
most MVD title, registration and driver license
services. They often offer convenient
extended hours on weekends and evenings.
Convenience fees apply. MVD monitors the
quality of third party work to ensure it meets
state standards.	operational
For a list of MVD Third Party offices,
visit azdot.gov/mvdlocations.
Driver Education Services
MVD’s Authorized Third Party driver training
schools offer education and behind the wheel
training for new drivers and for those who
wish to brush up on their driving skills. The
schools are required to teach MVD’s training
curriculum, based on national standards.
MVD, in collaboration with the Arizona
Department of Education, also approves high
school driver education programs. A list of
professional driving schools can be found
online at azdot.gov/mvd.
Traffic Survival School Program
The Traffic Survival School Program is
designed for drivers who have convictions for
serious driving violations, have an
accumulation of points on their driving record
or are at risk of having their driving privilege
suspended. The program’s goal is to change or
modify risky or unsafe driving behavior. Traffic
survival schools are licensed by the Arizona
Chapter of the National Safety Council (NSC).
NSC qualifies instructors to teach the MVD
approved curriculum. A list of authorized
traffic survival schools can be found online at
azdot.gov/mvd.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 4 of 57 --

5
Vehicle Inspections
Vehicle inspections match the vehicle
identification number (VIN to the vehicle
ownership documents to determine the
identity of the vehicle’s owner and, in some
cases, to verify that the vehicle is properly
equipped for highway use. Third Party providers
are authorized by MVD to perform Level I
inspections. If necessary, vehicles are referred to
MVD for a Level II or Level III inspection.
Fees at MVD Offices
Operator or Motorcycle License
Ages 16-39 $25
$20
$15
40-44
45-49
50 & over and 5-year $10
$10
$7
$7
$3
Limited License
Instruction Permit
Motorcycle Endorsement
Restricted Instruction Permit
Replacement Driver License $12
Replacement Instruction Permit 	$2
$15
$5
$25
Out-of-State Driver License Skill
Test
Out-of-State Vision Screening
Travel Driver License
Identification Card (ID)
$12
65 & over No fee
$12	Replacement Identification Card
$25
Commercial Driver License (CDL
For commercial driver license fees,
please refer to the Commercial Driver
License Manual or azdot.gov/mvd.
If your license is revoked, suspended or
canceled, you may be required to pay another
application fee, in addition to a reinstatement
fee.
Tips for Faster Service
$3
$5
$500
$600
Uncertified 39-month
Certified 5-year
Abandoned Vehicle Fee
Abandoned Vehicle Fee (on
federal land)
Returned Check Fee $25
▪
▪
Visit AZMVDNow.gov to determine
whether your transaction can be
completed online.
Visit AZMVDNow.gov to complete an
application for an ID, driver license or
title.
▪ Visit AZMVDNow.gov to schedule an
appointment for a road test, Travel
credential, or driver license renewal.
▪ Avoid the first two days and the last two
days of the month and the day after a
holiday. In addition, most offices are
closed until noon on the second
Wednesday of each month.
▪ Bring your out-of-state driver license
– it will be used as a secondary form of
identification and may waive the
written/road test.
▪ Bring required identification.
▪ Bring your out-of-state title, registration
and license plates.
▪
▪
Have your vehicle identification number
(VIN) handy.
In addition to cash, most fees may be
paid by credit card, cashier’s check or
money order.
▪ Please make your cashier’s check or
money order payable to: "Motor Vehicle
Division."
Ages 0-64
Other Fees
Travel Identification Card
Motor Vehicle Record
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 5 of 57 --

6
Name and Address Changes
You are required by law to notify MVD
within 10-days of any change to your name
or address. If you do not report a change, you
may not receive renewal notices or other
correspondence concerning your driver
license or vehicle records and you may be
cited by law enforcement.
You may report a change of address online at
AZMVDNow.gov. For an address change,
provide your full name, and new address with
zip code, plus your driver license number,
date of birth and the last four digits of
your Social Security Number. If you wish to
have your new address displayed on your
credential, you may apply and purchase a
replacement license.
MVD’s computer system links all of your MVD
records together. When you submit a change
of address, we will update your driver license
or identification card record and each vehicle
record for which you are listed as the first
registered owner.
To complete a name change, you may
visit any MVD office or an authorized
third party office that offers driver
license services. You will need to present
appropriate identification in both your new
and previous names. If you wish to show your
new name on your license, you may apply for
a replacement license. All names must be
verifiable with Social Security Administration
records.
Military Personnel Information
Military personnel based in Arizona who
qualify for an exemption under the Soldiers
and Sailors Relief Act are not considered
Arizona residents.
Upon discharge, military personnel may work
in Arizona for up to 90 days, without
obtaining an Arizona driver license, if all of
the following are met:
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
Native American Designation
A Native American Designation on an Arizona
driver license, instruction permit or
identification card is available to enrolled
members of a federally recognized Indian
Tribe located in Arizona. The
“NATIVE AMERICAN” distinguishing mark
will be printed on the front of the driver
license, instruction permit, or ID.
A new application and photo are required
and standard transaction fees apply. For a
full listing of acceptable documentation the
Division may accept as proof of veteran or
Native American status, please visit our
website azdot.gov/ mvd.
Visit our website at azdot.gov/mvd
for information on a 5-year driver
license and vehicle services available to
military personnel.
Veteran Designation
A Veteran Designation on an Arizona
driver license, instruction permit or
identification card is available to U.S.
military veterans or active duty service
members. The “VETERAN” distinguishing
mark will be printed on the front of the
driver license, instruction permit, or ID.
▪ They possess a valid driver license
issued by another state or country.
▪ They operate a vehicle requiring a Class
D driver license.
▪ They are an employee, agent or
consultant of an organization that
operates in Arizona and at least one
other state or country.

-- 6 of 57 --

7
Before you can take the road test, you will
have to show that you understand the
meaning of Arizona traffic signs. You will
also have to respond to the following
directions in English:
▪ Stop
▪ Slow down
▪ Change lanes left/right
▪ Drive straight ahead
▪ Turn left/right at the next street,
corner, stop sign or traffic light
▪ Does your speedometer work?
▪ Fasten your seat belt
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
Motor Vehicle Records
You may obtain your driving or motor
vehicle record online at AZMVDNow.gov
or by completing a Motor Vehicle Record
Request form #46-4416 at azdot.gov/mvd
and visiting any MVD or Authorized Third
Party office. You will be required to show
identification.
Arizona’s Driver License
Arizona Revised Statutes, section 28-3153(D
provides that the Motor Vehicle Division
(MVD must not issue or renew a driver
license or identification (ID card for a person
who does not submit proof satisfactory to
MVD that the applicant’s presence in the
United States is authorized under federal law.
MVD is required to determine that each
applicant meets the requirements of the law.
Identification requirements may change
without notice.
Road Test
You may now schedule an appointment to
complete a road test! It is highly encouraged
that you schedule an appointment online to
ensure you are able to take the test when you
go to an office. You may schedule an
appointment at AZMVDNow.gov for a time
convenient for you. To get the earliest
appointment possible, be sure to check
multiple locations.
Visit AZMVDNow.gov for more information
regarding what is needed to take the road
test or to schedule your road test
appointment.
If a road test is required, you may drive a test
route that has a variety of traffic situations.
An examiner will ride with you in your vehicle
and give you directions to follow. You will be
observed and graded on specific actions and
on your general ability to safely operate the
vehicle.
Road tests may be suspended due to extreme
weather or safety conditions.
You must provide the vehicle to be used for
the test. The vehicle must be in good
operating condition: functioning brakes,
brake lights, turn signals and horn, a
windshield with no cracks, both inside and
outside rearview mirrors, and tires that are
in good condition. Passenger and driver side
windows must also be operational. The
passenger and driver door must open and
close properly. You must show proof of
current registration and current automobile
liability insurance. If your vehicle is a 1972
model or newer, it must be equipped with
seat belts, and these belts must be properly
fastened and adjusted.
Vehicle Insurance
Every motor vehicle operated on the
roadways of this state must be covered by
an insurance liability policy issued by a
company that is licensed to do business in
Arizona. The policy must be an Arizona
based policy that reflects where the vehicle
is predominantly being operated.
Minimum levels of financial responsibility for
private passenger vehicles are:
▪ $25,000 bodily injury liability for one
person and $50,000 for two or more
persons.
▪ $15,000 property damage liability.

-- 7 of 57 --

8
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
It is important that you verify that the
vehicle identification number (VIN supplied
by your insurance company matches the VIN
on your vehicle registration. If it does not
match, ask your insurance company to
resubmit the correct VIN.
You must have proof of current insurance
in the vehicle when operating the vehicle.
Law enforcement officers will ask you for
proof of insurance at the time of traffic
stops or crashes. Insurance companies
notify MVD of all policy cancellations,
non-renewals, and new policies. If your
insurance company sends MVD a notice
that your policy is no longer active, we will
send you an inquiry to verify insurance
status.
Failure to maintain proper Arizona
insurance with a correct VIN on file with
MVD could lead to the suspension of
your vehicle registration and/or driver
license. To verify your insurance coverage
on file with MVD, please visit
AZMVDNow.gov and click on “Manage
Insurance.”
National Driver Register
Arizona is a member of the National
Driver Register, a nationwide computer
system providing information about
problem drivers. When you apply for an
Arizona driver license, your information is
checked against this system. If you
have outstanding or unresolved
actions in another state, an Arizona
license will not be issued. If you
provide false information, your Arizona
driver license may be canceled.
Resident Definition
State law requires that you obtain an
Arizona driver license and registration
immediately if any one of the following
applies. If you:
▪ Work in Arizona (other than for
seasonal agricultural work).
▪ Place children in school without paying
the tuition rate of a non-resident.
▪ Have a business with an office in
Arizona, that bases and operates
vehicles in this state.
▪ Obtain a state license or pay school
tuition fees at the same rate as an
Arizona resident.
▪ Have a business that operates vehicles
to transport goods or passengers
within Arizona.
▪ Remain in Arizona for a total of seven
months or more during any calendar
year, regardless of your permanent
residence.
▪ Are registered to vote in this state.

-- 8 of 57 --

9
An “out-of-state student“ enrolled with seven
or more semester hours is not considered a
resident, even if employed.
Voter Registration
You may submit a voter registration form
at the same time you apply for a driver license
or ID card by completing the voter
registration portion of the driver license/ID
card application.
You are not required to register to vote
in order to obtain a license. If you decline to
register to vote, the fact that you have
declined will remain confidential. If you
do register to vote, the application will remain
confidential and will be used only for
registration purposes. Submitting a false voter
registration is a Class 6 felony.
To register, you must be all of the following:
▪ 18 years of age or older, on or before
the next General Election date.
▪ A United States citizen.
▪ A resident of Arizona.
▪ Have not been convicted of a felony,
unless your civil rights have been
restored.
▪ Have not been adjudicated
incompetent.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
You may also register to vote online at
AZMVDNow.gov or by completing a
separate voter registration form, which can
be obtained at an MVD office or by calling
602.542.8683 or toll free 1.877.THEVOTE.
You must be registered to vote 29 days
before an election in order to qualify to vote
in the upcoming election. There is no fee to
register vote.
If you change your address, you must
re-register to vote. You may register online
at AZMVDNow.gov.
Organ and Tissue Donation
A Donor Registry has been established
in Arizona. The application for a driver
license or identification card includes a
box for you to check if you would like to
be added to the Donate Life AZ Registry
as an organ and tissue donor.
You can save and heal lives through
organ and tissue donation. Signing
up as a registered donor is easy. Save
those in need by signing up. You can
register in several ways:
▪ Say YES to being an organ and tissue
donor when getting a driver license or
identification card at an MVD or third-
party office.
▪ Check the box on the application when
getting a driver license or identification
card online at AZMVDNow.gov.
▪ Sign up at DonateLifeAZ.org or call
1.800.94.DONOR.

-- 9 of 57 --

10
Medical Condition Indicator
Space is provided on your license to indicate
medical conditions that may require
immediate attention. You must present a
statement about the medical condition,
signed by a licensed physician or registered
nurse practitioner to obtain a medical code
on your license.
Proof of Social Security Number
State and federal laws require you provide
proof of a valid Social Security number. Your
Social Security number will be used to verify
your identity and to comply with child
support laws. It will not be used as your
driver license number.
Classes of Licenses
Licenses are issued by “class”: Class G
(graduated, Class D (operator, Class M
(motorcycle and Class A, B, C (commercial.
If the Class M license is combined with
any other class of license, it will be added as
an “endorsement” on the back of
the current license.
Instruction Permit
If you are at least 15 years and 6 months of
age you may be issued a graduated and/or a
motorcycle instruction permit. You must be
at least 18 for an operator permit.
Graduated or operator permit: you must be
accompanied by a Class A, B, C or D licensed
driver at least 21 years of age, who occupies
the seat beside you. These permits are valid
for 12 months.
Motorcycle permit: you are prohibited
from carrying passengers or operating a
motorcycle on freeways or interstate
highways between sunset and sunrise, at
any time when there is not enough light to
clearly see persons or vehicles at a distance of
500 feet. The motorcycle permit is valid for 7
months and can be renewed only one time
within a 24-month period.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
To practice taking the written test,
please visit our website at azdot.gov/mvd.
Graduated License (Class G)
A graduated driver license is issued to
an applicant who is at least 16, but less
than 18, years of age and is valid to
operate any vehicle that does not
require a motorcycle or commercial
license.
Restrictions
For the first 6 months, a driver with
a graduated driver license shall not
drive a motor vehicle between the
hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. unless:
▪ A parent or legal guardian with a valid
Class A, B, C or D license occupies the
front passenger seat or:
▪ Driving directly to or from a
sanctioned school-sponsored activity,
place of employment, a sanctioned
religious activity or a family emergency.
▪
▪
The passengers are the teen driver’s
siblings or
The teen driver is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian with a valid
Class A, B, C or D driver license who
occupies the front passenger seat.
For the first 6 months, a driver with a
graduated driver license shall not drive a
motor vehicle containing more than one
passenger under the age of 18, unless:

-- 10 of 57 --

11
Applicants will be required to pass the
Division’s written test before being issued
an Arizona instruction permit. This does not
apply to Commercial Learner’s Permits.
Arizona will give applicants credit for the
time they have held their instruction
permit in another state.
An applicant for a graduated license must
have held an Arizona instruction permit for
at least 6 months.
The permit must be valid at the time of
application. An applicant must also have
satisfactorily completed an Arizona driver
education program approved by MVD or the
parent or guardian must certify in writing
that the applicant either has completed at
least 30 hours of supervised driving practice,
including at least 10 hours at night, or 20
hours of supervised driving practice with at
least six (6 hours at night if the minor
completed a Traffic Survival School or
Defensive Driving course.
An applicant holding a current and valid out
of state driver license may be exempt from
the driver education/driving practice and
instruction permit requirements.
The holder of a graduated license is not
required to obtain an operator license at age
18, but may choose to obtain one.
▪ Must attend Traffic Survival School.
▪ Violation goes on driving record.
▪ 3-month suspension of driving
privilege.
▪ Violation goes on driving record.
Second conviction of a traffic violation:
Third conviction of a traffic violation:
▪ 6-month suspension of driving
privilege.
▪ Violation goes on driving record.
Penalties
If you receive a citation, you may be eligible
to attend the Arizona Supreme Court’s
Defensive Driving Program. Please read the
information provided with your citation
carefully for information about your
options.
The following penalties are for drivers
who are under age 18, have a graduated
driver license, and are convicted of a traffic
violation.
There are additional penalties for violations
of curfew and passenger restrictions,
including fines and mandatory extension of
the 6-month restricted driving period.
Suspension of driving privilege results for a
third conviction of curfew and/or
passengerviolations, convictions of other
violations including alcohol-related
convictions.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
First conviction of a traffic violation:
Parent/Guardian Approval for
Applicants Under 18
If you are under 18, your application for an
instruction permit or driver license must
be signed by at least one adult. The adult
will be responsible for any negligence or
willful misconduct when you are driving.
The application must be signed by:
▪
▪
One natural/adoptive parent, if
married to the other natural/adoptive
parent.
Both natural/adoptive parents, if not
married to each other, but share joint
custody.
▪ One natural/adoptive parent with
sole custody.
▪ Legal guardian (proof required).
▪ Foster parent living with the minor
(proof required), or

-- 11 of 57 --

11
▪ Employer of the minor (parents’ death
certificates must be shown).
who might be called to military service if a
return to the draft is authorized by Congress
and the President.
If you are 18 to 25 years of age, registration
information will immediately be sent to
Selective Service. If you are under 18,
information will be stored and automatically
sent to the Selective Service when you reach
age 18. Selective Service will send you a
Registration Acknowledgment Card when
you Registration is complete.
For more information, call Selective Service
toll-free at 1.888.655.1825 or sss.gov.
Operator License (Class D)
An operator license allows you to drive any
vehicle that does not require a motorcycle or
commercial license. You must be at least 18
years of age to apply for an operator license.
Motorcycle License (Class M)
A motorcycle license or endorsement is
required to drive a motorcycle or motor
driven cycle. You must be at least 16 to apply
for a motorcycle license.
An applicant for a motorcycle license or
endorsement who is under 18 must have
held an Arizona motorcycle instruction
permit for at least six months. An applicant
The signatures must be witnessed by an
MVD agent or by a notary public.
Signatures obtained for an instruction
permit will be required again for a driver
license.
The person who signed the application
for the minor, as well as the person
with responsibility for the minor, may
cancel the minor’s license. The license
may be canceled by submitting a
"Driver License/ID Cancellation Request"
available online, at any driver license office,
or by sending a notarized letter authorizing
the cancellation to Motor Vehicle
Division , P.O. Box 2100, Mail Drop
533M, Phoenix, AZ 85001. Indicate the
license number, full name and date of
birth of the person who license is to be
canceled.
Selective Service Registration
Federal law requires that every male
United States citizen and male alien
residing in the United States or its
territories must register with the U.S.
Selective Service System within 30 days of
his 18th birthday. Arizona law requires that
by submitting an application for an original,
renewal or reinstatement driver license or
identification card, male applicants under 26
years of age consent to registration with the
Selective Service as part of the application
process. When submitting an application for
a duplicate driver license or identification
card, male applicants under 26 years of age
have the option to consent to registration as
part of the application process.
Registering with Selective Service does not
mean that you are joining the military.
Registration provides the federal
government with an accurate list of males
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
must also have satisfactorily completed a
motorcycle driver education program that is
approved by MVD or the parent or guardian
must certify in writing that the applicant has
completed at least 30 hours of supervised
motorcycle driving practice.
An applicant holding an out-of-state
motorcycle license or endorsement may
be exempt from the driver education/driving
practice and instruction permit requirements.
For addi onal information, see
the Motorcycle Operator Manual,
available online at azdot.gov/mvd or any MVD
or Third Party office.

-- 12 of 57 --

13
Commercial Driver License (Class A, B or C)
A commercial driver license (CDL is required
for operating a commercial motor
vehicle grouped by the following classes:
▪ Class A: Any combination of vehicles
with a gross combination weight
rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more
pounds, provided the GVWR of the
vehicle(s) being towed is in excess of
10,000 lbs.
▪ Class B: Any single vehicle with a
GVWR of 26,001 lbs or more, or any
such vehicle towing a vehicle not in
excess of 10,000 lbs GVWR.
▪ Class C: Any single vehicle, or
combination of vehicles, that meets
neither the definition of Group A nor
that of Group B, but is designed to
transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver, or is used in the
transportation of hazardous materials
requiring placarding. A Passenger (P)
or a Hazardous Materials
Endorsement
(HME) is required to obtain a Class C
CDL.
Identification (ID) Card
The identification card is available to all ages
(including infants for $12. Persons over
the age of 65 or anyone receiving Federal
Supplemental Security Income disability
checks receive the card free of charge.
You may not possess an identification card
and a driver license at the same time.
An Arizona ID Card with a photo allows law
enforcement agencies to rapidly distribute
your child’s information and photograph in
the event of an AMBER ALERT.
A new photo will be needed as your child grows
and changes. Photo updates are available at
MVD offices. A duplicate identification card
with the new photo costs $12.
What do I need to bring to MVD?
Before you visit, complete your application
for a driver license or identification card
online at AZMVDNow.gov. The website will
also assist you with determining what
documents you may need to bring with you
for your visit. For more information on driver
license or identification cards, please visit
azdot.gov/driver-services.
For more information and requirements,
please see our website azdotgov/mvd or
obtain a copy of the CDL Driver License
Manual.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 13 of 57 --

14
Travel DL/ID
The Arizona Travel ID is the credential that
complies with the federal REAL ID Act of 2005.
The Travel ID is available as both a driver
license and identification card.
The Travel ID will serve as valid identification
to pass through airport security to board
commercial aircraft as well as access some
restricted areas in federal facilities, nuclear
power plants and military bases. Current
Arizona credentials will be sufficient until
May 7, 2025.
The Federal REAL ID act of 2005 requires
Arizona to distinguish between compliant and
non-compliant credentials and clearly state on
all non-federally compliant credentials
“Not for Federal Identification.” All federally
compliant credentials will be printed with
a yellow star shape insignia near the upper
right corner of the credential.
The Travel ID cost is $25 for first time issuance
and renewals. In most instances, it will be
valid for eight years.
The Travel ID can be obtained at MVD offices
and Authorized Third Party Driver License
providers. For more information on locations,
please visit azdot.gov/mvdlocations.
Required for a Travel DL/ID
One of the following is required:
▪ Valid, unexpired U.S. Passport or
Passport Card.
▪ Original or certified copy of a birth
certificate filed with a state office of
Vital Statistics or equivalent agency in
the individual’s State of Birth (Hospital
records/certificates and California
Certified Abstracts of Birth are not
acceptable).
▪ Consular Report of Birth Abroad issued
by the U.S. Department of State Form
FS-240, DL-1350 or FS-545.
▪ Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident
Card Form I-551 issued by DHS, or INS.
▪ Unexpired employment authorization
document (EAD) issued by DHS, Form
I-766 or Form I-688B.
▪ Unexpired foreign passport with
a valid unexpired U.S. visa affixed,
accompanied by the approval I-94
form documenting the applicants
most recent admittance into the U.S.
▪ Certified of Naturalization issued by
DHS Form N-550 or Form N-570.
▪ Certificate of Citizenship Form N-560
or Form N-561, issued by DHS.
Social Security Number
(A valid Social Security Number must be
provided)
Proof of Residency
Two documents or mail issued from a
business, organization or government agency
that contain:
▪ Applicant name
▪ Physical residential address
Replacement Credential Information
If you possess a regular and a federally
compliant credential you will be required to
purchase a duplicate of both credentials
should your driver license or identification
card become lost, stolen, destroyed, or
unreadable. All fees related to duplicate
identification cards or driver licenses apply.
Replacement Travel Credential
You may obtain a duplicate license for $12 if
you meet one of the following criteria:
▪ Your Arizona driver license or
identification card is lost, stolen,
destroyed, or becomes unreadable. If
your license have been lost or stolen
and you have a reason to believe
someone else is using it, the incident
should be reported to your local
police department as an identify
theft.
▪ Your address or name changes.
▪ You wish to update your photo.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 14 of 57 --

15
▪ You wish to remove your Social
Security number from your license.
▪ You wish to convert a graduated
license to an under 21 driver license.
▪ You wish to convert an under 21
license to a regular driver license.
▪ You must provide two acceptable
items of identification. If your name
has changed, you will need to
present identification in both your
new and previous names (i.e., court
document). A replacement license
may be obtained online at
AZMVDNow.gov. If your license is
more than 12 years old, you must
visit an MVD office to obtain the
duplicate so that your photo may be
updated.
Applying for a Title and Registration
When you buy a vehicle, Arizona law requires
that you apply for a title within 15 days
of purchase or transfer. If your vehicle
was registered in another state and you
wish to operate it in Arizona, you must
register it here as soon as you become
an Arizona resident (see “Resident
Definition” on page 8).
Most vehicles may be registered for either
1- or 2-year periods. (Some vehicles must
be emission tested every year and are,
therefore, not eligible for 2-year registration).
A 5-year registration option is
offered for vehicles that do not require an
emissions test during the five years of the
registration period.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 15 of 57 --

16
Section 1
BEFORE YOU DRIVE
Preparation
Your vehicle must have no defective or
missing equipment. The following equipment
must be in working order:
▪ Brakes
▪ Speedometer
▪ Turn signals
▪ Windshield (intact)
▪ Horn
▪ Tires in good condition
▪ Seat belts
▪ Driver and front passenger side windows
▪ Emergency flashers
Prior to starting your vehicle, adjust your
seat, steering wheel, rear view and outside
mirrors. Before putting the vehicle in motion,
check your turn signals and brakes to ensure
they are in working order.
Tire Safety
Arizona’s seasonal extreme driving conditions
make tire maintenance very important. Many
tire professionals offer free inspections. This
is the best way to ensure your tires can
handle the intense summer heat, the summer
monsoon storms, and winter snow and ice in
the high country.
There are some basic checks that you can do
yourself:
Tire Pressure
Find the recommended psi (pounds per
square inch for your vehicle, typically on the
door jamb. Use a tire pressure gauge to check
the reading and either add air or let it out as
needed.
Tread Depth
You can check for wear by using the penny
test. Select a point on your tire where the
tread appears to be lowest and place Abraham
Lincoln’s head into one of the grooves. Part of
Lincoln’s head should be covered by the tread.
If not, it may be time to replace your tires.
▪ Have the lap and shoulder belt
properly adjusted and fastened while
the vehicle is in motion, or
▪ If only a lap belt is installed where the
occupant is sitting, the lap belt must
be properly adjusted and fastened
while the vehicle is in motion.
Arizona’s Safety Belt Law
(Buckle Up Arizona!)
Each front seat occupant of a motor vehicle
per federal and state motor vehicle safety
standards must either:
The operator of a motor vehicle must require
all passengers under the age of 16 years to
buckle up.
A combination lap/shoulder belt greatly
reduces your chances of being seriously
injured in a motor vehicle crash. The lap belt
prevents ejection and protects your lower
body. The shoulder belt keeps your head and
chest from striking the dashboard or
windshield. In vehicles with automatic
shoulder belts and manual lap belts, it is
extremely important to buckle the lap belt.
Child Car Seat Safety Information
(Buckle Up Children!)
Seat belts are not designed for children.
Arizona law requires that a person shall not
operate a motor vehicle on the highways in
this state when transporting a child who is
under five years of age unless that child is
properly secured in a child restraint system.
Additionally, children between five and eight
years of age are required to be in a child
restraint system until they are a minimum of
four feet, nine inches tall.
If you see an unrestrained child in a moving
vehicle, please call 1.800.505.BABY with the
vehicle plate number, city, and location of the
child in the vehicle.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 16 of 57 --

17
Drivers transporting more than one child under
eight years of age must secure as many children
in child restraint systems as reasonable given
the size of the passenger area and number of
passengers being transported.
Child restraint systems must meet
U.S. Department of Transportation
safety standards and must be used by
following manufacturer’s and automobile
manufacturer’s instructions.
Air bags can save lives and prevent serious
injuries, but they are unsafe for children
under 12 years of age. Children age 12 years
and under should never ride in the front seat
of a car. If a child must ride in the front seat
of a car, please turn the front passenger-side
air bag off (most newer vehicles are equipped
with an on/off switch).
Governor’s Office of Highway Safety
For more information on safety issues,
contact the Arizona Governor’s Office of
Highway Safety. In Phoenix call 602.255.3216,
statewide call toll-free 1.877.355.3216, or
online at azgohs.gov.
Travel Information Service
With a rapidly growing transportation
system, travelers need current travel
information fast. Dial 511 any time,
day or night for up-to-the-minute reports
about:
▪ Traffic Conditions and Road Closures
▪ Transit
▪ Airports
▪ Tourism
▪ Metro Region Quick Reports
▪ Construction and Work Zones
Dial 511 and press the star key (*) to activate
the systems touch tone mode and you will be
guided through the available features. You may
also use the voice-activated prompts. When
using voice activation, please listen to the entire
introduction and reduce background noise.
In addition, travel information is available via the
Internet at az511.com.
511 and az511.com are provided as free
services by the Arizona Department
of Transportation.
Check the Vehicle
How safely you can drive also depends on the
vehicle you are driving. It is the responsibility of
drivers to make certain that the vehicles they
drive are safe to operate. A vehicle that is
unsafe costs more to operate than one that is
maintained.
A vehicle in good condition can give you an
extra safety margin when you need it.
Your vehicle may be required to have an
emission inspection at an authorized Inspection
Station. If the vehicle does not pass, you will be
given 30 days to have the problem fixed and
have a follow-up emission test re-check.
Follow your vehicle owner’s manual for routine
maintenance. Some maintenance you can do
yourself and some must be done by a qualified
technician. A few simple checks will help
prevent trouble on the road.
All Truck and Trailers
Secure and Cover Loads!
According to Arizona law, “A person shall
not drive or move a vehicle on a highway, street
or roadway unless the vehicle is constructed
or loaded in a manner to prevent any of its
load from dropping, sifting, leaking or
from	otherwise escaping the
vehicle." (A.R.S 28-1098.A.).
Required Equipment for
Motor Vehicles
Brakes
Every motor vehicle must have brakes in good
working condition. Cars and trucks must have
both a foot brake and a parking brake. Each set
of brakes must apply to at least two wheels. A
motorcycle must have at least one brake that
may be applied by hand or foot. Trailers of 3,000
lbs or more gross weight.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 17 of 57 --

18
Safety Belts
Each front seat occupant of a motor vehicle
manufactured after 1972 must have the seat
belt properly fastened and adjusted while the
vehicle is in motion.
Child Safety Seats
A child less than 8 years old must be properly
secured in a child passenger restraint system
while being transported in a vehicle in
this state.
Head Restraints
Seat-back head restraints are designed to
reduce the chance of whiplash injury in rear-
end crashes. If they are adjustable, they should
be positioned to fit against the back of your
head and to line up with the middle of the ear.
Muffler
Every motor vehicle must have a muffler
in good working condition and in constant
operation to prevent excessive pollution or
unusual noise. It is against the law to use a
muffler “cut-out,” bypass or similar device.
Air Pollution Control
Motor vehicles of 1967 model year and newer
must be equipped with an exhaust emissions
system to help reduce air pollution. Also, the
engine of every motor vehicle must be
equipped to prevent the escape of excessive
fumes and smoke.
Windows and Windshields
Vehicles must have a windshield (without
cracks and windshield wipers that are in
good working condition. Sun screening tint
materials on windows and windshields are
legal only within certain limits. Owners should
make sure that the manufacturer or installer
of the material complies with Arizona law.
Rearview Mirrors
Every vehicle that is made or loaded so that
the driver’s view to the rear is blocked must
have at least one outside driver side mirror
that shows the view of the highway for at
least 200 feet to the rear.
Horns and Warning Devices
A working horn that can be heard for 200 feet
is required on your vehicle. Emergency
vehicles may have a siren, whistle or bell.
Red Lights and Flashers
Flashing red warning lights are prohibited on
the front of the vehicle, even those vehicles
that are disabled, except on authorized
emergency vehicles, school buses and snow
removal equipment.
Hazard warning signal lights (emergency
flashers should be activated whenever your
vehicle is stopped on the roadway or
shoulder of the road.
Section 2
SAFE DRIVING PRACTICES
Defensive Driving
Driving defensively will help protect your life
and your driving record.
“Defensive Driving” means being constantly
aware of the driving conditions, planning
ahead, anticipating dangers and taking the
right action so as not to come in contact with
any obstacle or another vehicle.
We all want to avoid crashes that could result
in injury or even death. But, even when there
is no injury, a crash means inconvenience and
auto repair costs. It may also result in a court
appearance and fines, as well as increased
insurance rates.
Attitude and Awareness
Courtesy and consideration toward others
are the most important driving attitudes you
can develop. They are the key to safe driving.
Concentration and alertness are other
important elements. You must develop the
habit of keeping your mind on driving.. Driving
when you are drowsy, or under emotional
distress, can be just as dangerous as driving
while impaired.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 18 of 57 --

19
Foresight
Foresight means being able to size up traffic
situations as quickly as possible and being
prepared to take corrective action. Safe
driving requires exercising good judgment
and recognizing the proper choices to make in
any given traffic situation.
Even the most experienced drivers make
mistakes. Regardless of how many years
you’ve been driving, at some point you
will face equipment failures, bad weather
conditions, unskilled drivers on the road, and
drivers who ignore traffic regulations.
The best way to prepare yourself for
unpredictable events is to drive defensively.
▪ Always maintain good vision ahead
and around your vehicle.
▪ Stay alert and be prepared to react
to the unexpected.
▪ Obey speed limits and know
when to slow down and stop for
unexpected events.
▪ Always wear your safety belt.
As a defensive driver, you should constantly
look ahead of you and around you, and always
check your mirrors. Be aware of the road
conditions or possible hazards that lie in front,
to the sides, and behind you.
Knowledge and Experience
The beginning driver should learn through
instruction, observation, and practice. If you are
not enrolled in a driver training program, ask an
experienced, skilled, licensed driver for help.
After you obtain your instruction permit,
practice by starting your vehicle, moving out of
your parked area, stopping, and maintaining
vehicle control in a parking lot or other open
area with little traffic.
Practice will sharpen your basic skills and build
your confidence.
Experienced drivers, on the other hand, often
face the problems of carelessness,
overconfidence and bad driving habits that
develop over time. Driving rules and
techniques have changed over the years and
the amount of traffic is constantly increasing.
Your ability to adjust and adapt to changes will
determine how safe a driver you really are.
Your knowledge should include recognition of
the hazards of driving and how to protect
yourself, and others.
A skill is a well rehearsed driving strategy that
involves anticipation, reaction and the
constant changing of the space between your
vehicle and other vehicles. You must continually
strive for improvement. Improvement can be
measured in your elimination of risk-taking, your
adherence to speed limits and your ability to
take corrective action when necessary.
Distractions
It is your responsibility to pay full attention to
your driving. Avoid distractions
while driving, such as:
▪ Reading a GPS unit or road map.
▪ Using a phone, texting or using other
electronic handheld devices.
▪ Searching for an item dropped on the
seat.
▪ Tending to children.
▪ Fastening a safety belt while driving.
Even minor distractions can take your
attention away from driving. There is a
potential crash in every minor distraction.
Pull off the road safely and stop if you are
going to use a cell phone or send/receive a text
message. While operating a motor vehicle,
both hands should be on the steering wheel,
allowing the driver full control of the vehicle.
Arizona law prohibits holding or supporting a
wireless device while driving. Drivers may not
write or read any text-based communication
while driving, and may not watch, record,
or broadcast video while driving. A wireless
device may only be used while driving in
order to report an emergency.
Wireless devices may be used for hands-free
or voice-to-text operations.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 19 of 57 --

20
Steering
The proper way to stay in your lane of travel is
to look well ahead and make only slight
steering corrections as needed. Drivers tend to
steer towards what they are looking at. When
driving in a curve or turn, if you look generally
to the outside of your lane of travel while in the
curve, you are more likely stay within your lane.
Only practice can teach you how to steer.
Scanning
Be alert and watch for cars, bicyclists, people
or animals that may cross your path. Such
areas may include intersections, crosswalks,
shopping centers, construction areas and
playgrounds. Keep your eyes moving and
learn to “read” the road. To avoid the need
for last minute decision making, look ahead
for a distance of about one city block..
When approaching an intersection, be sure to
check both left and right before proceeding..
By frequently checking the traffic behind you,
you will know when someone is tailgating or
moving up too quickly. Check your rearview
mirror often for the position of traffic behind
you. When changing lanes, check your side
mirrors and turn your head and look over
your shoulder to be sure that it is safe to
proceed with the lane change. By knowing the
speed and position of traffic on all four sides
of your vehicle, you will be better able to
make decisions quickly and safely.
Positioning Vehicle
Cushion of Space Around Your Vehicle
You can use the “3-6 second” rule to
determine if you have enough cushion
between you and the vehicle you are
following. When the vehicle ahead of you
passes a certain point, such as a sign or over-
pass, count “one-thousand-one, one-
thousand-two, one-thousand-three, one-
thousand-four.” This takes about four seconds.
If you pass the same point before you finish
counting, you are following too closely. At
faster speeds, the distance should be greater.
At times you will need more than a 3-second
cushion (e.g., poor road conditions). Give
yourself 3 to 6 seconds for more cushion.
The space between you and other vehicles
gives you (and the other drivers) time to react
in emergencies and avoid collisions. Create a
space cushion around you by staying in the
middle of your lane. Make sure there is enough
room ahead and behind to pass or stop safely.
Leave enough space between you and the car
ahead of you to allow for a sudden stop. At
high speeds, the distance your vehicle travels
while you are reacting to a problem is greater -
and your margin for error is less. If you are
following too closely, you may not be able to
stop in time. Most rear end crashes are caused
by following too closely.
When sharing a lane with a bicycle, allow at
least 3 feet of clearance between you and the
bicycle.
Moderate your speed.
:06 	:03
Help the driver behind you maintain a safe
following distance by driving at a constant
speed and signaling in advance whenever you
are slowing or stopping.
If another driver is following too closely,
gradually slow down and give additional
cushion between you and the vehicle in front of
you. This additional space allows you to brake
more slowly to accommodate the reaction time
and braking of the vehicle that is tailgating you.
When safe to do so, you can move to another
lane to encourage the tailgater to pass..
Remember, what you do can affect the driver
behind you, especially if you must stop suddenly.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 20 of 57 --

Blind spots are areas on the left and right
sides of your vehicle that are not visible in your
mirror. Blind spots can occur when vehicles are
parked too close to an intersection or when
bushes, trees and buildings block your view. In
situations like these, slowly inch your vehicle
forward until you have a clear view. Then
proceed when the way is clear.
Avoid driving in someone else’s blind spot.
This can be just as dangerous as not checking
your own. Speed up or drop back but never stay
for an extended time in a blind spot area. Make
sure your vehicle can be seen by other drivers.
Do not rely on your mirrors alone to see other
vehicles. Look over your shoulder to see if the
way is clear before changing lanes.
Entering/Crossing Traffic
When entering the roadway from a side road
or private drive, stop and wait for traffic to
clear. Don’t assume that a vehicle using a turn
signal is actually going to make a turn, wait
until after you see the other driver commit to
the turn before entering the roadway.
Communicating
Any time you plan to change directions, use
your turn signals – whether you are changing
lanes, turning at an intersection, entering a
freeway, pulling away from a curb or pulling
off to the side of the road. Develop the habit
of using your turn signals even when you do
not see other vehicles on the road. The
vehicle you do not see is the most dangerous
one. Communicating means clearly showing
other drivers and pedestrians what you plan
to do early enough to avoid a collision. Here
are some rules to follow:
21
▪ If you plan to turn beyond an
intersection, do not signal until you are
in the intersection (drivers in the
intersection may pull into your path).
▪ After you complete your move, be sure
your turn signal is off.
▪ Signal at least 100 feet (approximately
4 seconds) before you turn so other
drivers will have time to react.
Signaling
Signaling lets other drivers know you are
going to do something different and gives
them time to react to your move. Signaling
does not give you the right-of-way. Turns
may be indicated using turn signals, hand
signals, or both. The law designates which
lanes and positions you must use when
turning and requires you to signal at least
100 feet before you turn.
You should always signal before you:
▪ Change lanes.
▪ Turn at an intersection or into a
driveway or alley.
▪ Enter or leave a freeway.
▪ Pull away from the curb.
▪ Pull over to the side of the road.
▪ Slow down or stop suddenly (when
using hand signals).
Hand and turn signals are shown below.
RIGHT TURN
LEFT TURN
SLOW DOWN/STOP
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 21 of 57 --

22
Passing
When you want to pass a vehicle traveling in
the same direction, pass on the left. Signal that
you are about to change lanes. Make sure you
have time and room to get all the way in front
of the vehicle you are passing without creating
danger for vehicles coming toward you. Move
into the left lane and pass the vehicle. When
you can see the entire front or both headlights
of the vehicle you passed in your rearview
mirror, look over your shoulder to be sure the
lane is clear, signal that you are changing
lanes, then return to the lane on the right. This
procedure also applies to passing slow-moving
bicycles and mopeds.
When another vehicle comes up behind you
and sounds its horn or flashes its lights, move
to the right when safe and let it pass. Never
speed up when another vehicle is passing you.
Passing on the Right
Passing on the right is permitted only when it
is safe and:
▪ The driver of the other vehicle is
turning left (never pass to the left of a
driver who has signaled a left turn).
▪ An open highway is clearly marked for
two or more lanes of vehicles moving
in the same direction as you are going.
▪ You are in a business or residential
district where the pavement is marked
for two or more lanes of vehicles
moving in the direction you are going.
▪ You must never pass on the right by
driving off the paved or main portion
of the roadway.
Do Not Pass
You must not pass when:
▪ Approaching within 100 feet of a
railroad crossing.
▪ Within 100 feet of a bridge, tunnel, or
underpass where your view is blocked.
▪ There is a double solid line or a solid
dividing line on the lane in which you are
driving.
▪ Approaching a curve or the top of a hill
where you cannot see ahead to be sure
of safe passing.
▪ Approaching within 100 feet of a street
crossing.
Roundabouts
A roundabout is a circular intersection or
junction in which road traffic flows almost
continuously in one direction around a central
island. Always yield to pedestrians and
bicyclists that are crossing the road. Always
enter a roundabout to the right of the central
island. Vehicles approaching the roundabout
must yield to all vehicles already in the
roundabout and must yield to large vehicles
that are entering the roundabout at the same
time.
Know Where You’re Headed – Know where you
want to go as you approach the intersection.
Follow the signs and get in the appropriate lane.
How to drive in a roundabout:
▪ Slow down as you approach the
intersection; roundabouts are
designed for speeds of 15-20 mph.
▪ Yield when a large vehicle approaches
the roundabout at the same time;
slow down or stop if necessary.
▪ Enter the roundabout when there is a
gap in traffic. Once inside, do not stop.
Follow directions on signs or pavement
markings about which lane to use.
▪ You may exit at any street or continue
around if you miss your exit.
Yield – Vehicles in the roundabout have the
right-of-way.
Watch Out for Large Trucks – Yield to them as
they enter the roundabout. Don’t try to pass
large trucks in the roundabout.
Emergency Vehicles – Proceed with caution in
the roundabout when you see an emergency
vehicle. Exit if you can, or pull over to the right.
Pedestrians – Use crosswalks and use caution.
Bicyclists – Be aware of traffic rules or walk
your bike and use the crosswalks.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 22 of 57 --

23
Diverging Diamonds
A Diverging Diamond interchange (DDI is a
newer design now in use at some freeway
interchanges in Arizona. The DDI includes
intersections and traffic signals that allow
traffic on a cross street (above or below the
freeway to briefly switch to the left side of
the roadway to better facilitate traffic flow
and enhance safety. Vehicles are guided
safely through the interchange using signals,
signs and pavement markings.
As with other interchanges, drivers travel
through the DDI by following traffic signals,
signs and pavement markings. The crossover
points (to transition from the right side to
the left side of the road and vice versa occur
at the signals.
Signal operations are simplified in a DDI
because there is no need to allocate green
light time specifically for left turn
movements from the cross street to the on-
ramps. Instead, left turns are made using
free-flowing lanes after the cross-over.
YIELD
ONE WAY
LEFT TURN
U-TURN
ST RAIGHT
RIGHT TURN
As you approach the roundabout, slow
down and YIELD until there is a safe gap
before entering.
When safe, enter and complete your turn
or U-turn.
Parking
You must be sure that you are not in the
way of traffic, obstructing visibility or in
an illegal parking zone when you park on a
public roadway.
International Symbol of Access
This symbol, which appears on reserved
parking signs, placards and license plates, is
the international symbol of access for
persons with disabilities. Parking spaces
marked with this symbol are only to be used
by a vehicle displaying a valid placard or
license plate with this symbol, and only when
transporting the person who was issued the
placard or plate.
It is illegal for anyone else to park in these
spaces and may result in a fine.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 23 of 57 --

24
Backing Up/Reversing
Backing up or reversing your car is dangerous
because it is hard for you to see behind you.
Here are some rules you should follow
whenever you have to back your car:
▪ Check behind your car before you get
in. Children or small objects are hard
to see from the driver’s seat.
▪ Turn around so that you can look
directly through the rear window. Do
not depend on your mirrors or backup
cameras.
▪ Back up slowly.
Parallel Parking
When parallel parking, be sure to continually
check for oncoming traffic. Your ability to judge
distances while controlling the speed of your
vehicle is the key to completing this maneuver.
To parallel park correctly:
▪ Check traffic behind you and signal that
you are stopping.
▪ Stop when you are alongside the forward
car and your car’s back bumper lines up
with the back bumper of the parked
vehicle. Leave approximately two feet
between you and the forward car.
▪ Shift into reverse. While looking over
your right shoulder, back up slowly
while turning the wheel sharply to the
right.
▪ When your front bumper passes the
rear bumper of the forward car, turn
the wheel sharply to the left. Keep
backing until parallel to the curb.
▪ Straighten the wheels and slowly pull
forward.
Parking on a Hill
When you park on a downhill grade, turn
your wheels toward the curb and set your
parking brake.
If you park on an uphill grade, turn your
wheels to the left, let your car roll back until
the right front wheel rests against the curb
and stops. Set your parking brake.
If there is no curb, turn the wheels to the
right so that the car will roll away from the
center of the road in the event the brakes fail.
Always set your parking brake.
Downhill - Curb Uphill - Curb Uphill - No Curb
Emergency Parking
If it is necessary to leave your vehicle parked
on a highway or street, follow these rules:
▪ Pull onto the shoulder of the road as far
away from traffic as possible. If there is
a curb, pull your vehicle as close to the
curb as possible.
▪ Set your parking brake, shift into park or
leave the vehicle in gear (for manual
transmission), and turn off the engine.
▪ Set out proper emergency signals.
▪ Stay with your vehicle if possible until
assistance arrives.
▪ Lock your vehicle if you have to leave it.
Prohibited Parking
It is illegal to park:
▪ On a sidewalk.
▪ In front of a private or public driveway.
▪ Within the boundaries of an intersection.
▪ On a crosswalk or within 20 feet of a
crosswalk at an intersection.
▪ On any freeway or interstate highway
(except for an emergency).
▪ In any area with signs prohibiting parking.
▪ Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
▪ Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing.
▪ On a bridge or within a tunnel.
▪ In such a way that you create a hazard
for other vehicles.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 24 of 57 --

25
match that of vehicles already on the
▪ If you miss your exit, do not stop.
Never back up on a highway. Get off
the highway at the next exit and look
for signs showing you how to rejoin
the road in the other direction.
Freeway Driving
Freeways and interstate highways are
designed to handle higher speed traffic safely.
Entering a Freeway
Traffic entering a freeway must yield right-of-
way to traffic already on the freeway. Drivers
entering the freeway are responsible for
safely merging. Match the speed of your
vehicle to the speed of traffic in the right lane
of the freeway. Signal before you merge.
Check traffic around you. When clear, merge
carefully. Do not cross a solid line or drive
through a gore area. See figure "A" on page
26.
Exiting a Freeway
Be sure to signal before exiting the freeway.
Most freeways have deceleration lanes to
assist you in your exit. Use proper braking to
allow for a smooth exit. Be sure to maintain
adequate space (space cushion) between
your vehicle and the vehicle ahead when
exiting in heavy traffic. Do not cross a solid
line. See figure "B" on page 26.
A divided highway/freeway has separate
roadways for traffic in opposite directions,
often with multiple lanes on each side. Some
highways intersect other roads and are
controlled by traffic signals. Others are
controlled access, which means they have no
signals or intersections; you enter and exit
these highways using ramps. These are called
“expressways” or “freeways” and the points
at which you can enter or exit are known as
intersections.
Entering and Exiting the Highway
Make sure you are in the proper lane
well in advance so you can safely enter or exit
the highway.
▪ Be sure to signal your exit before you
reach the exit ramp.
▪ Yield the right-of-way to drivers
already on the highway.
▪ As you approach and enter a highway
travel lane, increase your speed to
Lane Use
On all roadways with two or more lanes, drive
on the right half of the roadway except when
passing or when signs indicate otherwise.
On highways with three or more travel lanes in
the same direction, the right lane is typically
used for entering and exiting and so traffic in
this lane may be traveling either slower or
faster than traffic in other lanes. During rush
hours, drivers not intending to exit may want
to avoid these lanes during these times. This
will leave room for vehicles entering and
exiting. Be alert for other vehicles attempting
to merge into your lane, and use proper signals
to let other drivers know if you are changing
lanes. Do not exceed the posted speed limits.
Avoid
“tailgating” (following the car ahead of you too
closely).
Gore Area
It is against the law to drive over or park in any
part of a gore area. A gore area is the space
between a through roadway and an entrance
or exit ramp. See figures “A” and “B” on page
26.
Stopping on the Freeway
If you need assistance, pull over onto the right
shoulder as far as possible. Avoid stopping
your vehicle on or near freeway ramps.
To signal for assistance on the freeway, turn
on your emergency flashers or raise the hood
of the car. To signal after dark, turn on your
inside dome light and/or set out flares or
portable warning signals. Wait for help. Do not
walk along the freeway.
While driving on the freeway, watch for
disabled vehicles. If you approach a disabled
road.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 25 of 57 --

26
vehicle, reduce your speed, move over, and
proceed around the disabled vehicle with
caution. See page 30 “Move Over AZ”.
Freeway Restrictions
High-Occupancy-Vehicle (HOV Lanes)
HOV
HOV lanes are indicated by white diamonds
in the roadway as seen here.
On the freeway:
Other Freeway Restrictions
Do not:
▪ Drive over or across any median or
divided highway separation.
▪ Make a U-turn.
▪ Change lanes without signaling.
▪ Drive onto the freeway, except at an
on-ramp.
▪ Park or stop on the freeway, except
in specially provided areas (parking
▪ Back up if you miss an exit (you must
go on to the next exit).
Driving on the Highway
▪ Make sure your vehicle is in good
operating condition and can maintain
highway speeds.
▪ Stay to the right and only use the left
lane for passing. If you are traveling
on a highway with three lanes, treat
the far right lane as a slower-speed
through lane and the far left lane as
the passing lane.
▪ Drive in the middle of your lane,
staying between the lines.
▪ Use your rearview mirror and your
directional signals when changing
lanes.
▪ You may not drive a vehicle carrying
fewer than two persons, including the
driver, in an HOV lane at the posted
times Monday through Friday. At
those times, the HOV lanes are
restricted to car pool vehicles,
motorcycle or buses. A motorist who
violates this restriction is subject to
substantial fines and penalties.
▪ Always signal and use caution when
merging across the solid white line
into and out of the HOV lane.
Section 3:
ROADWAY AND VEHICLE
KNOWLEDGE
The flow of traffic on our streets and
highways is controlled by various signal
lights, traffic signs and pavement markings.
You must fully understand their meaning in
order to drive safely. There are also various
requirements concerning vehicle
equipment that you should know. This
section provides information about these
important basics.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
on the shoulder of the freeway is
prohibited, except in case of
emergency).

-- 26 of 57 --

27
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
Signal Lights
Signal lights (red, yellow and green) are
placed at many intersections to regulate the
direction and flow of traffic. These traffic
lights apply to pedestrians, bicycle and
moped riders, as well as to motorists. You
must obey the signal lights unless a police
officer is directing trafficcc
to do otherwise.
RED − Red Means Stop!
This signal means STOP. You must
come to a complete stop before
you reach the intersection, stop
line or crosswalk. Remain stopped for as long
as the light stays red. Where not prohibited
by signs, a right turn may be made after
coming to a complete stop, when motor
traffic and pedestrian traffic are clear.
YELLOW − Yellow Means
Caution!
This signal means CAUTION. A
steady yellow light is a warning
that the light is about to turn red. If you have
not entered the intersection, you should
come to a safe stop. If you are already in the
intersection, you should continue moving and
clear it safely. Speeding up to “beat the light”
is illegal and could cause a crash.
GREEN − Green Means Go,
if Clear!
This signal means GO. You may
go through an intersection in
the direction indicated by the signal if the
roadway is clear. Check left and right for
cross traffic before entering the intersection
to avoid a collision with a red light runner.
Yield to any vehicle that is already in the
intersection when the light changed.
Figure B: How to exit a freeway.
Figure A: How to enter a freeway.
TRAFFIC FLOW
OBEY RAMP
SPEED LIMIT SIGNAL AND CAREFULLY
MERGE INTO TRAFFIC
CORRECT	WRONG
GORE AREAA 3-point penalty on
driving record if crossed.
1 3
TRAFFIC FLOW
DO NOT SLOW DOWN ON
FREEWAY
SLOW DOWN IN EXIT LANE
OBEY RAMP
SPEED LIMIT
CORRECT EXIT
WRONG EXIT
GORE AREA
1 2
3
A 3-point penalty on
driving record if crossed.
2 F
A
REEW
CCELERA
AY SPEED
TE TO

-- 27 of 57 --

28
Flashing Red Light
A flashing red light has the same meaning as a
stop sign. You must come to a full stop, then
proceed with caution when the roadway is clear.
Flashing Yellow Light
A flashing yellow light means you should slow
down and proceed with caution if the roadway
is clear.
Red Arrow
A lighted red arrow means that you may not
turn in the direction of the arrow. You must
stop and wait for the green signal to appear
before turning.
Yellow Arrow
A yellow arrow warns that the light is about to
change to red. If you have not entered the
intersection, you must stop and wait for a
green arrow. If you are already in the
intersection, you should continue your turn
and clear the intersection safely.
Flashing Yellow Arrow
A flashing yellow arrow means you should slow
down and turn with caution if the roadway is
clear. Yield the right-of-way to any oncoming
vehicle or pedestrian before making your turn.
Green Arrow
A green arrow appearing alone or with
another signal light means that you
may proceed in the direction of the
arrow, if you are in the proper lane and
the roadway is clear.
Inoperative Signal Lights
When approaching an intersection with an
inoperative traffic control signal, treat it as
you would a 4-way stop. Come to a complete
stop before entering the intersection and then
proceed when the roadway is clear.
If two vehicles arrive at the intersection at
about the same time, both must stop and the
driver of the vehicle on the left must yield the
right-of-way to the driver on the right.
Rules of the Road
"T” Intersections
At a “T” intersection, the driver on the street
which ends must yield the right-of-way to
vehicles on the cross street.
Vehicle #1 has the right-of-way. 	1
2
Controlled Intersections
You must obey the traffic signals and signs.
Yield the right-of-way to other vehicles as
directed. Do not assume it is safe to proceed
just because you have the right-of-way. Check
for traffic and pedestrians.
Stop without
pavement markings:
Stop near the
intersecting roadway
where you have a
clear view of
approaching
traffic.
Crosswalk without
a stop line:
Stop at the nearest
crosswalk line.
Crosswalk with a
stop line:
Stop at the stop line.
Stop line only:
Stop at the line.
Uncontrolled Intersections
When approaching an intersection with an
inoperative traffic control signal or no traffic
lights, stop signs or yield signs, treat it as you
would a 4-way stop. Come to a complete stop
before entering the intersection and then
Arizona Driver License Manual and Customer Service Guide

-- 28 of 57 --

29
Vehicle # 1 to your right
has the right-of-way.
1
2
proceed when the roadway is clear. If two
vehicles arrive at the intersection at about
the same time, both must stop and the
driver of the vehicle on the left must yield
the right-of-way to the driver on the right.
Right-of-Way
The law requires certain vehicles to yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles. The law does
not actually “give” the right-of-way to any
particular motorist, it just states who must
yield. No one is allowed to take the right-of-
way if taking it means a crash may result.
Pedestrians
You must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
crossing the street in any marked or unmarked
crosswalk. When the light turns green, you
must still yield to pedestrians and vehicles in
intersections. The law also requires vehicles
to come to a complete stop at any school
crossing when the crosswalk is occupied by
any person. You may not pass another vehicle
that is stopped for a pedestrian, even if you
have a clear lane or a green traffic signal. In the
interest of safety, if you see persons crossing
any street, give them the right-of-way.
Pedestrian Activated Signals
For pedestrian crosswalks with electronic
signals, be mindful of the following indicators:
▪ Flashing Yellow – Pedestrian has
activated signal
▪ Solid Yellow – Prepare to Stop
▪ Solid Red Lights – STOP. Pedestrian is
in the crosswalk.
▪ Flashing Red Lights – STOP. Then proceed
with caution after pedestrian finishes
crossing the driver’s half of the roadway.
▪ All Lights Blank – Proceed with caution
if crosswalk is clear
Important Rules for Pedestrians
There may be times when you are the
pedestrian crossing the road. Keep in mind, in
many instances and circumstances, it’s easier
for you to see an approaching vehicle than it
is for the driver of the vehicle to see you. This is
especially true at night, in low-light conditions
such as dusk and dawn and in inclement
weather. Don’t assume an approaching vehicle
sees you and will yield to you.
▪ Use crosswalks when provided or
cross at an intersection.
▪ Make eye contact with the drivers of
approaching vehicles whenever
possible.
▪ Look before you step into a
roadway. Even at a crosswalk,
drivers must be given time to
perceive and react to you stepping
into the roadway.
▪ Avoid distractions, such as using
phones or wearing headphones/
earbuds, while crossing the road.
▪ Cross in a well-lit location at night.
▪ Follow all traffic rules, signs and
signals that may be present where
you are crossing.
Alleys and Driveways
When entering the roadway from an alley or
driveway, you must stop before reaching the
sidewalk. Yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and approaching vehicles.
Left Turn
When you are preparing to turn left, you
must yield the right-of-way to any oncoming
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 29 of 57 --

30
On-coming
vehicle #1 has
the right-of-way.
1
2
U-Turn
U-turns are permitted as long as the
movement can be made safely, does not
interfere with other traffic and is not
prohibited by signs. When making a U-turn,
you must yield to approaching traffic and
make the turn only when it is safe to do so.
Red Light Running
If you receive a citation for running a red light,
or another civil traffic violation,
you may be eligible to attend the Arizona
Supreme Court’s Defensive Driving Program.
Please read the information provided with
your citation carefully for information about
your options.
If you run a red light (or a flashing red
light) and receive a traffic citation, upon
conviction of that violation you will be
required to attend Traffic Survival School. The
Motor Vehicle Division will be notified of your
successful completion of Traffic Survival
School, and no further court appearance is
required.
If you run a red light and cause a crash
that results in life-threatening injuries to
another driver or passenger, you may be fined
up to $500 and your driving privilege may be
suspended for three months. Additionally,
you may be ordered to perform community
service.
If you cause a crash that results in the death of
another driver or passenger, you may be
fined up to $1,000 and your driving privilege
may be suspended for six months.
Additionally, you may be ordered to perform
community service.
MVD is required by law to order the
completion of Traffic Survival School (TSS) for
every red light conviction reported by the
courts. Points are assessed and will appear
on your driver record. Payment of the fine is
assuming responsibility for the violation and
is reported to MVD as a conviction. Failure to
complete the course results in an indefinite
suspension of your driving privilege.
Emergency Vehicles
Always be alert for emergency vehicles,
especially at intersections. When a police car,
fire engine, ambulance or other emergency
vehicle approaches using a siren, lights or
other warning devices, you must yield the
right-of-way. Move to the right side of the
road and stop until the vehicle has passed.
On a four-lane highway with at least two
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the
approaching vehicle, proceed with due
caution. Yield the right-of-way by making
a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that
of the emergency vehicle. If changing lanes is
not possible or unsafe, proceed with due
caution and reduce the speed
of your vehicle.
Following Emergency Vehicles
When an emergency vehicle, such as police,
fire or ambulance, with flashing lights and/or
giving an audible signal approaches, a driver
shall yield the right-of-way, move to the right
and stop their vehicle until the emergency
vehicle has passed. The driver shall maintain a
distance of at least 500 feet behind a fire
department vehicle responding to an
emergency and at least 300 feet behind a
police vehicle responding to an emergency. Do
vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 30 of 57 --

31
not drive into or park your vehicle within the
block where the emergency vehicle has
stopped to respond to the emergency.
The “Move Over Law” (ARS 28-775) requires
motorists to move over one lane to create a
safe margin of space when driving by any
vehicle with flashing lights pulled to the side
of a road or highway. If it’s not safe or
possible to move over, motorists must slow
down and use caution. This law pertains to
all vehicles pulled over with flashing lights,
including emergency-response and law-
enforcement vehicles, tow trucks, highway
maintenance vehicles and private vehicles. It
applies to all freeways and other multiple
lane highways, city roads and streets. Learn
more online at MoveOverAZ.org.
Funerals
Drivers must yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle that is part of a funeral procession
being led by a funeral escort vehicle flashing
a red or a blue light.
School Buses and School Zones
When approaching a school bus that is
picking up or dropping off passengers,
you must come to a complete stop before
reaching the bus, regardless of your
direction of travel. A school bus will have
alternating flashing lights and a mechanical
stop-sign arm extended while passengers are
entering or leaving the bus. You must remain
stopped until the school bus moves ahead or
until the stop-sign arm and flashing lights are
no longer shown. Watch for children crossing
the road in front of, or behind the school
bus.
You are not required to stop for a school bus
on a divided roadway when traveling in the
opposite direction. A divided roadway is one
in which the road is separated by physical
barriers such as a fence, curbing or
separation of the pavement. Roadway
striping by itself does not constitute a physical
separation of the roadway.
CAUTION: Motorists should exercise
extreme care when in the vicinity of any
stopped school bus, as a child may dart from
the front or the rear of the bus.
The following image is an example of an
undivided roadway. You must stop for any school
bus with flashing lights if its stop-sign arm is out.
Below is an example of a divided roadway and
you may proceed with caution if the school
bus is in approaching lanes but not if it is
stopped in your direction of traffic.
Speed Limits
Vehicle speed is an important part of traffic
safety. You must obey all speed regulations
and be ready to adjust your speed quickly if
necessary.
Elements such as road conditions, traffic
flow and the number of crashes are used to
determine the proper speed limits for
roadways. You must obey all posted limits..
The following speed limits must be observed
when no limit is posted:
▪ 15 mph when approaching a school
crosswalk.
▪ 25 mph in any business or residential
district.
▪ 55 mph on open highways or city
freeways.
▪ 65 mph on designated open highways.
▪ 75 mph on rural freeways.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 31 of 57 --

32
White speed limit signs with black letters are
regulatory signs and indicate the maximum
speed you can legally go. Orange signs with
black letters indicate recommended safe
speeds due to the curvature or grade of
the road or other special conditions at that
location. Slow down until you are assured of
safely navigating the location.
Special Speed Limit Areas
ROAD
CONSTRUCTION
AHEAD
DETOUR
Adjusting Speed to Conditions
NO
PASSING
ZONE
The speed limits are set for the best driving
conditions. When driving in bad weather, your
speed should be reduced to a level that is
reasonable. Three guidelines are:
▪ When driving on wet roads, reduce
your speed appropriately.
▪ When driving on roads with snow or
ice, reduce your speed appropriately.
▪ When driving in bad weather, double
the following distance from the
vehicle in front of you and reduce
speed appropriately.
Traffic Signs
Traffic signs regulate traffic and provide
important information.
The shape of a traffic sign can give you as
much information about the meaning of a
sign as the sign’s color or wording. When
visibility is poor, such as in heavy rain, dust
storms, or fog, you may be able to make out
only the shape of a particular sign.
Regulatory Signs
Octagon
This shape is reserved for stop
signs. You must come to a
complete stop.
Triangle
This shape requires that you
yield the right-of-way to cross
traffic or to merging traffic.
Impeding Traffic
Driving too slowly can be as dangerous as
driving too fast. Remember to drive in the
right lane and allow faster moving vehicles to
pass whenever you are driving slower than
traffic around you.
Rectangular
These signs regulate traffic and direct the
driver’s speed and direction.
GO STRAIGHT
OR TURN LEFT
NO “U” TURN 	NO LEFT TURN 	NO RIGHT TURN
Warning Signs
Turn, Curve and Winding Road Signs
These signs are used to warn drivers of turns
in the roadway. Below the signs may be small
yellow square signs indicating the safe speed
to drive through the curve.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 32 of 57 --

33
Pennant
This sign marks the
beginning of a
no passing zone.
Diamond
Yellow, diamond-shaped signs warn of a
possible danger ahead.
Pedestrian Crossing
Signal Ahead 	Two-Way Traffic 	Bike Crossing
Merge 	“Y” Intersection 	Start of
Divided Highway
Low Clearance Slippery When Wet 	Side Road
Cattle Crossing 	Crossroad
to Right
Four-Way
Intersection
Crossroad
to Left
Graded Hill 	End of
Divided Highway
School Crossing Sign
Permanent five-sided (pentagon shaped)
school crossing signs warn drivers that
children may be crossing any time of the day.
School crossing signs may be yellow. Yellow-
green signs are being posted by many Arizona
school districts.
Drivers must also obey the portable signs
placed at times in the center of the roadway..
The maximum speed from the first sign to
past the school crossing sign is 15 mph.. When
portable signs are not in place, the normal
speed limit for the area applies.
Passing another vehicle in a school crossing
zone is prohibited. There will often be a
crossing guard assisting children crossing the
roadway. Follow the instructions of the
crossing guard, and come to a complete stop
when any person is in the crosswalk.
Railroad Warning Sign
A circle-shaped sign provides a
warning that you are
approaching a railroad crossing.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 33 of 57 --

34
▪ Flashing red lights
▪ Lowered crossing barricade
▪ Ringing bells
▪ Flagger warning of an approaching
train or other on-track equipment.
Do not cross the tracks until all signals have
stopped and the crossing barricade is up all
the way. Do not drive around or under a
lowered crossing barricade.
In addition to obeying the regulations
above, the following rules will reduce your
chances of becoming another fatality:
▪ Expect a train or other on-track
equipment on any track at any time.
▪ Do not get trapped on a railroad
crossing.
▪ Get out of your vehicle if it stalls on
the tracks.
▪ Look for a second train or other on-
track equipment in the other
direction.
▪ Never race with a train or other on-
track equipment.
▪ Watch for vehicles such as buses and
gasoline tankers, which must stop at
railroad crossings.
▪ When driving at night, be alert for
railroad crossing warning signs that
are not lighted.
Guide
Highway Signs
Interstate Route
Marker
U.S. Route
Marker
State Route
Marker
4
0
3
Mile Posts
MILE Arizona is one of the few states where all
state highways have mileage markers. These
reference “posts” are set 2 feet off the right
shoulder and are about 1 mile apart.
Mile posts can be used to tell where you
are located if you are involved in a crash, have
mechanical problems, or are out of gas. If you
have to stop, note the route you are on and
the approximate distance from a mile post.
Roadway Construction and
Temporary Work Zones
Work zones are common and are set up for
road construction or maintenance. They may
be planned long term projects with
permanent signs or temporary work areas set
up for just a few hours with portable signs
placed just for that activity. Work zones pose
a unique hazard to drivers and the people
who are there to perform the work. Crashes
that commonly occur in a work zone are rear
end collisions from drivers going too fast,
crashes with fixed objects or vehicles hitting
people working in the area. Always be on
high alert and expect to stop or slow down
suddenly for changing or unexpected
conditions, including changes to the road
surface. Workers and construction vehicles
may be immediately adjacent to the travel
lanes or may enter the travel lanes at any
point in the work zone. Comply with the
speed limit and other warning signs that are
set up for your safety.
Warning Devices and Signs
Alerting and controlling devices are used
in road construction and in maintenance
work areas to direct drivers or pedestrians
safely, as well as to protect the safety of
highway workers. Orange is the basic color
for these devices. You must drive slowly and
be especially alert at all construction sites..
Always obey the posted speed limit.
Railroad Crossing Sign
This sign marks the location of a
railroad crossing. When you
arrive at a railroad crossing, you
must stop no closer than 15 feet
from the nearest railroad track when you
observe any of the following:
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 34 of 57 --

35
Fines double in work zones
Speed limits are set for a work zone not only
to protect the drivers passing through, but
also to protect the people who are performing
the work. When signs are posted, fines for a
speed violation are doubled.
flags or stop/slow panels to direct traffic
through work zones. Remember to drive
carefully through construction areas to
protect workers on the roadway.
Construction and Maintenance Signs
Construction and maintenance signs are used
to notify drivers of possible danger in or near
work areas. Most signs used in highway and
street work areas are diamond-shaped.
Flashing Arrow Panels
Flashing arrow panels are used both day and
night to give advance warning to drivers to
move to the right or left into another lane.
Slow down and prepare to merge in the
direction of the arrow.
FINES DOUBLE
Fines double when traffic violations occur in
work zones on Arizona streets and roadways.
Flaggers
Flaggers are often used in road
work zones to stop, slow or
guide traffic safely through the
area. Flaggers wear orange
vests or jackets and use red
Electronic Signs
Electronic message signs are used on some
roadways to give you advance warning of
construction zones, special traffic directions,
road closures or even weather conditions.
Cones, Drums, and Barricades
These devices are used to alert you and to
guide you safely through the work area. At
night, they may be equipped with warning
lights. You must slow down when you drive
through these areas.
Pavement Markings
Pavement markings are used to guide and
warn drivers, as well as to regulate traffic.
Markings may be either yellow or white and
can appear in combinations. Each combination
has a different meaning. Yellow center lines
indicate that there is two-way traffic, flowing
in both directions. White lines are used
to separate lanes of traffic moving in the same
direction and to mark the edge of the
roadway, stop lines and pedestrian crosswalks.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 35 of 57 --

36
Broken Yellow Lines
Broken yellow lines separate lanes or
traffic going in opposite directions
and indicates that passing on the left
is permitted when the roadway is
clear. Since you are facing oncoming
traffic, overtaking and passing must be done
with extreme caution.
Solid and Broken Yellow Lines
A broken yellow line alongside a
solid yellow line indicates that
passing is permitted only in one
direction. If the broken yellow line
is on your side, you may pass
when the roadway ahead is clear. If the solid
yellow line is on your side, you may not pass.
Double Yellow Lines
Double solid yellow lines mean
that passing is not allowed in either
direction. You may not cross the
lines unless you are turning left.
Broken White Lines
Broken white lines separate lanes of
traffic going in the same direction.
These lines may be crossed with
caution. (Remember to signal your
intention to change lanes).
Solid White Lines
Turn Lane Arrow
If you are traveling in a lane
marked with a curved arrow and
the word ONLY, you must turn in
the direction of the arrow. If your
lane is marked with both a curved
Bicycle
Bicycle Warning 	Bike Lane
Solid white lines are used for turn
lanes and to prevent lane changes
near intersections. Sometimes these
lanes have arrows as seen below.
and a straight arrow, you may turn in the
direction of the arrow or you may go straight.
A bicycle painted on the road indicates the
potential presence of bicyclists. Drivers
should exercise caution.
Painted Curbs
A painted curb means that you must follow
special rules to park there. The colors on the
curbs mean:
White
You may stop only long
enough to pick up or drop
off passengers.
Yellow
You may stop only long
enough to load or unload.
Stay with your car.
Red
You may not stop, stand or
park.
One-Way Streets
If you will be traveling on a one-way street
for several blocks, it is best to stay in the
center lane. The left and right lanes will be
used by turning vehicles.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 36 of 57 --

37
Use of Lanes
White Lane Lines
White lane lines separate lanes of traffic
moving in the same direction. Single white
lines may also mark the right edge of the
pavement.
Broken White Lines
A broken white line separates two lanes
traveling in the same direction. Once you
have signaled, and if it is safe to do so, you
may cross this line when changing lanes.
A solid white line marks the right edge of the
roadway and separates lanes of traffic moving
in the same direction. Only cross the solid line
on the right edge of the roadway in case of
emergency or to avoid a road hazard. Vehicles
may cross a solid white line when merging
into and out of the High Occupancy (HOV)
lane.
Double Solid White Line
A double solid white line separates two lanes
of traffic going in the same direction. Crossing
a double solid white line is prohibited.
Yellow Lane Lines
Yellow lane lines separate lanes of traffic moving
in opposite directions. Single yellow lines may
also mark the left edge of the pavement on
divided highways and one-way streets.
Reversible Lanes
Some travel lanes are designed to carry traffic
in one direction at certain times and in the
opposite direction at other times. These lanes
are usually marked by double-dashed yellow
lines. Before you start driving in them, check
to see which lanes you can use at that time.
There may be signs posted by the side of the
road or overhead.
Turning
Rules for turning apply
at all locations, even
driveways and alleys, not
just at intersections.
Signal, reduce your
speed and turn smoothly
when safe to do so. As
you turn, make sure to check for pedestrians,
mopeds and bicycles. In some areas, turns
may be made from more than one lane. If
this is allowed, signs and pavement markings
will direct you. At some
locations, turns may be prohibited by signs.
Right Turns
As you prepare to turn right, stay close to the
right curb or edge of the road. Do not swing
wide before or while turning.
Right on Red
When turning right at a red light, you must
first stop completely before reaching the
marked or unmarked crosswalk. Look for “No
Turn On Red” signs.
Always yield the right-of-way to pedestrians,
bicyclists and, oncoming traffic. Unless
signs direct you otherwise, turn into the right
lane of the road you enter.
Left Turns
On a two-way road, approach the turn with
your car in the lane just to the right of the
center line. Turn just to the left of the center
point of the intersection. Enter the lane just
to the right of the center line. This avoids
conflict with other traffic making either right
or left turns.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 37 of 57 --

38
Approach with your car
in the traffic lane nearest
the left curb. Turn
without swinging wide.
Bring your car into the
extreme left traffic lane
on the road you are
entering. This is the only
left turn situation where, unless signs prohibit
it, you may make the turn against a red light
after stopping and yielding to traffic and
pedestrians.
Left Turn — Two-Way Road To
One-Way Road
Approach the turn in the
traffic lane just to the
right of the center line. As
you enter the intersection,
turn into the extreme left
lane of the road you are
entering. (A right turn in
the pattern also is shown).
Left Turn — One-Way Road To
Two-Way Road
If a special lane for making left turns has
been signed or marked, use that lane – do
not turn left from any other lane.
Left Turn — One-Way Road To
One-Way Road
Approach the
intersection in the traffic
lane closest to the left
curb. Turn into the lane
just to the right of the
center line. Do not move
to the right lane without
checking traffic to your right and signaling
for a lane change. This turn cannot be made
against a red light.
Left Turn — Two-Way Left Turn Lane
Many two-way streets have a center lane
marked as a two-way left turn lane. This lane
is bordered on either side by two yellow
lines – the inner line is broken, the outer line
is solid. This lane is only for use of vehicles
turning left in either direction. This lane
provides a safe area to slow before a left turn
off of the street, or to drive into when
turning left from a side street or driveway.
Drivers should follow these rules:
▪ Signal before entering the lane.
▪ Move completely into the lane.
▪ Be alert for others using the lane.
▪ Do not use the two-way left turn lane for
passing, for thru traffic or to accelerate in
order to merge with thru traffic.
METRO Light Rail
METRO light rail vehicles are operating on
Valley streets in Maricopa County.
Vehicle traffic flows alongside light rail vehicles.
Learn and follow the rules of light rail safety:
METRO Safety By Design
▪ Improved pedestrian signals
Improvements include countdown
signals, new walkways and landscaping
to reduce jaywalking. Special attention
has been given to safety in school
zones with the installation of new
signals at some crossings.
▪ Protected turn lanes
Automobiles may turn across the
METRO tracks only from designated
turn lanes controlled by traffic signals.
▪ Train-only track-way
METRO travels in its own track-way,
separated from traffic by six-inch
curbs. Auto traffic may cross only
at controlled locations, and special
traffic signals and warning signs
activate when trains approach.
▪ Station design
Stations are designed to discourage
jaywalking. Each station has two
access points, reachable by signalized
crosswalk. Station platforms and vehicle
floors are the same height, providing
passengers with a no-step entry.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 38 of 57 --

39
▪ Signals at frontage roads
Frontage roads near the tracks are
controlled with traffic signals and are
designed to handle large trucks and
emergency vehicles.
▪ Vehicle design
Cameras inside and outside allow
METRO operators to ensure that
passengers clear the doors while
boarding and deboarding. Doors must
close before the vehicle can move.
Smooth stops mean that no wheelchair
tie downs are needed.
▪ Light rail coupler design
To minimize injuries in the event of a
crash, the couplers that connect light
rail vehicles are covered in an energy
absorbing material.
Train Approaching Sign
These electronic signs are
posted at all METRO light rail
intersections and flash when
a train is approaching the
intersection.
Combined U-Turn and Left Turn Sign
U-turns are permitted at
almost all of the light rail
intersections in the 20-mile
METRO system to allow
vehicles to cross the tracks.
Left turns and U-turns are
controlled with traffic signals.
Driving and Bike Riding
▪ Never stop or park your car or bike on
light rail tracks.
▪ Stop on red. A red arrow means “Do Not
Turn.”
▪ Look both ways before crossing the
tracks by car or bike.
▪ Never drive your car or ride a bike in the
area in which the train operates.
▪ The ends of a light rail train are
identical. White headlights show a
train approaching, red taillights
show it moving away.
Walking
▪ Don’t walk on or stand near the
tracks.
▪ Cross only at crosswalks and obey
the crosswalk signs.
▪ Be alert near the tracks: light rail is
quiet. Look for flashing train
headlights and listen for warning
bells and horns.
▪ Adults should hold the hands of
small children near the tracks and
on station platforms.
Kids: Be Smart, Be Safe
▪ Stop, look and listen around light rail
tracks.
▪ Cross intersections only in a crosswalk
and obey the crosswalk signs. At
crosswalks, get off bikes and
skateboards and walk them through
the crosswalk.
▪ Never play near the tracks, and
don’t climb trees or fly kites or
airplane models near the overhead
power lines.
▪ Skateboarding, rollerblading and
riding bikes on the tracks or on light
rail platforms is not safe and is not
permitted.
To learn more about METRO light rail
safety, please visit valleymetro.org/safety.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE
▪ Light rail trains are quiet. Pay
attention near the tracks: look for
flashing train headlights and
listen for warning bells and horns.

-- 39 of 57 --

40
Section 4
SHARING THE ROAD WITH
OTHER VEHICLES
Sharing the Road with a Bicyclist
Bicyclists must obey the same traffic laws as
drivers of vehicles, and they have the right-of-
way under the same conditions as motorists.
Motorists should be alert for bicyclists along
the roadway because bicyclists are often
difficult to see. Extra caution is necessary.
Motorists are required to allow a minimum
safe distance of 3 feet when passing a
bicyclist traveling in the same direction. It is
not safe for motorists to honk their horn at
bicyclists when passing, as this may startle
them and cause them to crash.
Bicycle Warning Bike Lane
At night, dim your headlights to be courteous
to bicyclists.
Drivers should be prepared for a bicyclist
swerving. Although bicyclists must ride with
the flow of traffic and stay near the right side
of the road, they can legally move left for
several reasons, such as:
▪ Turning left.
▪ Avoiding hazards.
▪ Passing pedestrians or vehicles.
▪ If the lane in which the person is
operating a bicycle is too narrow for
a bicycle and motor vehicle to travel
safely side-by-side.
▪ Do not carry more persons than the
design of the bicycle permits.
▪ Do not ride more than two side-by-side.
▪ Ride as near to the right side of the
road as practicable.
▪ Use proper hand signals.
▪ Do not bicycle under the influence of
drug or alcohol – it is illegal.
▪ When riding at night, have a white
head lamp visible from 500 feet, and a
rear reflector. You can improve your
visibility to drivers with a flashing red
beacon on the rear of your bicycle.
Sharing the Road With a
Motorcycle
Motorcyclists are more vulnerable to injury
than a car driver if involved in a crash.
Most car/motorcycle crashes are the result
of a car turning in front of a motorcycle,
usually because the driver did not see the
motorcycle or misjudged how close it was
and how fast it was traveling. Watch for the
unexpected and give the motorcycle its share
of the road.
Size
The smaller size of a motorcycle may make it
hard to spot in traffic, and it may appear to
be farther away and traveling slower than it
actually is. Because it is difficult to judge the
distance and speed, drivers need to pay close
attention and take extra care. Always watch
for motorcycles.
Lane Position
When it can be done safely, a motorcyclist
may pass a vehicle that is stopped in the same
direction and lane as the motorcycle provided
that:
▪
▪
The street is divided into at least 2
adjacent lanes traveling in the same
direction.
The posted speed limit does not
exceed 45 miles per hour.
▪ The motorcycle does not travel faster
than 15 miles per hour.
Important rules for bicyclists:
▪ Ride in the same direction as traffic.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 40 of 57 --

41
Intersections
Intersections are at risk for car/motorcycle
collisions, which are usually the result of a
driver turning into the motorcycle’s path. Do
not assume the rider’s intentions. A rider will
move to one side not only to prepare for a
turn, but also to avoid a hazard or to improve
visibility. Always watch for motorcycles and be
aware that one may unexpectedly come into
your lane.
Motorcycle turn signals do not automatically
shut off, and riders may forget to cancel them
after a turn is completed. Make sure you
know what the rider is doing before you move
into the motorcycle’s path.
Passing
Motorcycles are allowed the full width of a
lane in which to maneuver. Never crowd into
the same lane as a motorcycle. Returning to
the original lane too soon can force the rider
to swerve into traffic or off the road.
Sharing the Road With a Truck
Trucks are important to the Arizona economy,
transporting products that are critical to our
livelihoods. However, as a motorist, sharing
the road with large trucks can make you feel
very uncomfortable unless you learn how to
share the road safely with large vehicles.
Here are five ways to safely share the road
with trucks:
▪ Don’t cut in front of trucks. It takes
trucks twice as long to stop. If you move
into that space and have to brake
suddenly, you cut the truck’s available
stopping distance in half, placing you
and your passengers in danger.
▪ Watch out for the blind spots, or the
“No-Zone”, around large trucks and
buses. Trucks have large blind spots
around the front and back sides of the
vehicle. Be safe and don’t hang out in
the “No-Zone”.
▪ Follow trucks at a safe distance. Trucks
are almost as wide as some lanes of
of travel. If you follow too closely
behind, you won't be able to react
quickly enough to changing traffic
conditions.
▪ Pay close attention to truck turn signals.
Trucks make wide right turns and
sometimes must leave an open space to
the right just before the turn. To avoid a
collision, do not pass a truck on the right
if there is any possibility that it might
make a right turn.
▪ If you break down, pull off the highway
as far as you can. If a parked vehicle on
a highway shoulder is struck by a
moving vehicle, the damage suffered by
the parked car is more severe. When
the moving vehicle is a truck weighing
as much as 25 cars, the result could be
tragic.
Each of us must do our part to share the
road to arrive safely at our destination.
Slow Moving Vehicles
Farm machinery and other slow-moving
vehicles can be particularly hazardous. Be
sure to maintain a safe following distance
that provides an adequate field of vision.
Farm machinery usually travels at 25mph
or less, may take up more than one lane
of the road, and may not have signals. To
make a wide turn, operators or farm
machinery may first pull to the left, then
turn to the right.
When you see this symbol
on the back of a vehicle
ahead, it is a warning to
slow down. The vehicle
with the sign cannot
travel faster than 25 mph.
Do not become impatient if you
find yourself behind one of these slow
vehicles. It has the legal right to be there.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 41 of 57 --

42
Truck hauling an oversize load.
Section 5
ACTIVELY AVOIDING CRASHES
Braking and Stopping
It takes long distances to come to a safe,
complete stop. Braking distance is directly
related to:
▪ Speed of the vehicle.
▪ Driver perception time (length of time
it takes to see and recognize a
dangerous situation – the average is
0.75 seconds).
▪ Driver reaction time (time from
perception of danger to start of
braking – the average is 0.75 seconds).
▪ Type and condition of the pavement.
▪ Type and condition of the tires.
▪ Vehicle weight, including when loaded
or towing.
▪ Type and condition of the brakes.
The distance required to stop your vehicle is
important in helping you choose a safe
driving speed. It takes an average of 1.5
seconds for a person to perceive a threat in
the roadway and react to that threat. This
chart can be used as a guide, but your
actual stopping distance will depend upon
many of the factors listed above.
Stopping distances are based on tests
made by the Federal Highway
Administration with a driver
reaction time of 3/4 second.
20 22/25
55/188
66/300
74/455
30
40
50
60
70
50 150 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
Stopping Distance (Feet)
Speed
(MPH)
When vehicles ahead do something
unexpectedly, you will need time to react. You
need to keep enough following distance
between you and the vehicles ahead to avoid a
crash if the traffic stops suddenly. Allow at least
a 3-second following distance for most driving
situations. See page 19, “Positioning Vehicle”.
There will be situations where a longer (3 to 6
seconds) following distance will be required:
▪ When driving on slippery roads, you
should double your following distance
to 6 seconds or more to allow for the
extra distance needed to adjust your
speed or to stop.
▪ When the driver behind you wishes to
pass, reducing your speed will allow
that driver to pass more quickly. The
added distance will make it easier for
the passing motorist to pull back into
the lane.
When you are following a large vehicle, such
as a tractor-trailer, that blocks your field of
vision of the road ahead, you will need extra
distance to see around the vehicle.
Driving The Open Road
Driving on empty rural highways can be just
as dangerous as driving in heavy city traffic.
Animals in the road, slow-moving farm
equipment just over the crest of a hill or a low
spot covered with water are not unusual
hazards in rural driving. Stay alert, watch for
warning signs, and slow down when
approaching curves or hills that block your
Average stopping distance of cars on dry and level pavement.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 42 of 57 --

43
view of the roadway ahead.
Weather Conditions
Driving becomes more difficult when your
ability to see is reduced by bad weather or
when the road surface is covered with rain,
snow, or ice. Reduced visibility and traction
problems often occur at the same time.
Remember that changes in road and
weather conditions will reduce your time to
react and that those conditions will affect
the way your car handles. You must be ready
to respond. The first rule is to slow down to
make up for reduced visibility and reaction
time.
Sun Glare
Bright sunlight in the early morning or late
afternoon creates a glare when driving into
the sun. Glare can be reduced by wearing
sunglasses, keeping windows clean and using
sun visors. If the sun is behind you, oncoming
drivers may have the glare problem. They may
not be able to see your signals or your car.
Wind
Strong winds, especially crosswinds, can make
it more difficult for you to control your
vehicle. Wind is very dangerous if you are
driving a camper or large recreational vehicle,
or if you are towing a trailer. Lightweight
vehicles are also more difficult to control in
strong winds.
To gain more control over your vehicle in a
strong wind, slow down. If you are approaching
an open space after driving in a protected area,
be alert for crosswinds that will push you to the
side or middle of the road. If you are pulling a
trailer, the wind may cause your vehicle to
sway. Be ready to make necessary steering
corrections.
When you meet large trucks or buses, you may
also have to make steering corrections because
of the gusts of wind these vehicles create. If you
are pulling a trailer, wind currents can cause
your vehicle to jackknife. When a truck or bus is
passing you on the left, move as far as possible
to the right of your lane and slow down. As the
vehicle passes, accelerate slowly to keep the
trailer pulling in a straight path.
If you are driving into a strong head wind, you
may need to accelerate more, and steering will
be more difficult. A tailwind will increase your
speed, so you will have to decelerate and begin
braking earlier to stop.
Dust Storms
Pull Aside, Stay Alive!
Dust storms are common in Arizona and can,
at times, reduce a driver’s visibility to zero.. If
you encounter a dust storm, immediately
check traffic around your vehicle and begin
slowing down. Do not wait until poor visibility
makes it difficult to safely pull off the
roadway – do it as soon as possible.
If you encounter a severe dust storm:
▪ Reduce your speed immediately.
▪ Drive completely off the highway.
▪ Stop as far to the right as possible.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 43 of 57 --

44
▪ Do not stop in the travel lane or in
the emergency lane.
▪ Turn off your lights and take your
foot off the brake.
▪ Stay in the vehicle with your seat
belts buckled.
▪ Wait until the dust storm has
passed.
Rain
Driving in heavy rain can be
hazardous,especially if you also encounter
gusty wind conditions, such as in a
thunderstorm. Vehicles to the rear and in
blind spots are especially difficult to see. Wait
a short time after the rain begins before
using your wipers. The blades may cause
smearing if you have a dirty windshield. You
should slow down to increase the distance
between your vehicle and the vehicle ahead
to at least 6 seconds. Be extra careful during
the 30 minutes after rain begins; grime and
oil on the road surface mix with water and
make the road slippery.
Hydroplaning may occur during rainstorms.
In a heavy rain, your tires can ride on a film of
water, and at 50 mph your tires can lose all
contact with the road. Under-inflated, worn,
or bald tires lose contact with the road at
much lower speeds.
The best way to prevent hydroplaning is to
slow down. If your car does hydroplane:
▪ Take your foot off the accelerator.
▪ Do not brake.
▪ Avoid steering changes (if possible).
▪ Hold the wheel firmly until your
tires grip the road again.
Heavy rain frequently causes “flash floods” in
Arizona washes. Do not cross flooded washes.
Water can stall your engine, hide potholes and
can carry your vehicle downstream. Estimate
the depth of the water by looking at parked
cars or other objects along the road; watch
what other vehicles are doing. Two vehicles
should not meet in deep water; one should
go entirely through before another starts
from the other direction. This reduces the
possibility of stalling caused by waves of
water. You may be charged for emergency
response expenses if you or your vehicle
needs to be removed from a flooded road.
Driving through water must be done at a
slow and steady speed. Applying the brakes
gently with your left foot may help keep
them dry. Check your brakes after leaving
the water to see if they will stop the car. If
the brakes are wet, they may suddenly grab
or pull to one side. Dry them by
accelerating slowly while gently holding
down the brake pedal.
Liability for Emergency Responses
in Flood Areas
A driver of a vehicle who drives around
barricades set up due to flooding is liable
for the expenses of any emergency
response that is required to remove the
driver or any passenger in the vehicle that
becomes inoperable on a public street or
highway.
“Expenses of an emergency response”
means reasonable costs directly incurred by
agencies that make an appropriate
emergency response to an incident.
Fog
Fog reflects light and can reflect your own
headlights into your eyes. When driving in
fog, use low beams only and look for road
edge markings to guide you. Even light fog
reduces visibility and your ability to judge
distance, so it is very important to slow
down. Since conditions may change from
moment to moment as you pass through
areas of even thicker fog, you should adjust
your speed and be prepared for emergency
maneuvers. If necessary, pull off the road
and turn your headlights off, then stay there
until the fog lifts.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 44 of 57 --

45
Snow and Ice
Snow limits visibility, so turning on your
headlights is necessary to see and to be seen.
Often, snow will completely cover lane
markings. Drivers may tend to move away from
the edge of the road, thus passing closer to
each other. Snow or ice between your tires
and the road greatly reduces your traction and
increases the distance you need to stop by at
least 6 seconds. On slippery surfaces, you have
the most traction and control when the front
tires are rolling; therefore, your vehicle will
respond better to steering than to braking.
If you decide to brake on ice or other slippery
surfaces, apply the brakes gently, increasing
the pressure as you feel the tires grip the
road. Do not brake to the point that the
wheels lock. If the wheels should lock, ease
slightly off the brakes, but do not release them
completely. This action may unlock them
without losing brake power entirely. Then
apply the brakes and ease off again, repeating
the process.
Additional suggestions for safe winter driving:
▪ Drive with caution.
▪ Do not change speed or direction
suddenly.
▪ Clear snow or ice from all window and
lights so you can see and be seen,
before you start driving.
▪ Equip your car with snow tires or chains
to help prevent skidding and reduce
stopping distances.
▪ Slow down before stopping or turning
(driving on packed snow is much like
driving on ice).
▪ Watch for ice on bridges and in shady
areas (bridge surfaces freeze before
other road surfaces).
headlights on low beam. Your headlights
significantly improve your chances of being
seen and help other drivers avoid a collision
with you. On rural roads, your headlights
help drivers who may consider passing in
your lane see that you are approaching.
Night Driving
Reduced visibility, glare from oncoming
headlights, and unseen objects in the road
all combine to make night driving hazardous.
In the late afternoon, as soon as the light
begins to fade, turn on your headlights – not
parking lights – to make your vehicle more
visible to others. You must use headlights
from sunset to sunrise, but be aware that
other driver may not have turned on their
headlights.
Headlights are a poor substitute for daylight.
Never drive so fast that you cannot stop
within the distance you can see ahead with
your lights. Use low beams when driving on
city or town streets. Use high beams on
highways when no other vehicle is coming
toward you within 500 feet. Switch to low
beams whenever you meet oncoming traffic
to avoid blinding the other driver. When
following another car, use low beams
whenever you are within 200 feet.
If the high beams of an oncoming car are not
dimmed, avoid looking directly at the bright
lights. Glance toward the right side of the
road, then look ahead to determine the
position of the other vehicle. Keep doing this
until you have passed the other vehicle.
Do not become a victim of “Highway
Hypnosis” or “White Line Fever” (a trance-
like state that can occur during a long period
of highway driving). Any time you become
tired when traveling, pull over and rest. Use
the radio and fresh air to ward off highway
hypnosis. Stop every hour to walk and
exercise. This will help keep you alert.
Headlight Use
Low Visibility Conditions
When there is sun glare, rain, dust or any
other condition where your vehicle may not
be clearly visible to other drivers, turn on your
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 45 of 57 --

46
Wrong-Way Driver Awareness
Tips
How to Drive at Night
▪ No matter the time of day, drivers
should drive defensively. That means
being constantly aware of driving
conditions, your surroundings and
anticipating dangers so you can take
evasive action if you encounter a
hazard, such as a wrong-way driver.
▪ Don’t tailgate. Leave enough space so
if the vehicle in front of you makes a
sudden lane change to avoid a wrong-
way driver, you’ll have time to react, too.
▪ Be aware of your surroundings. While
wrong-way drivers are usually in the left
or HOV lane, they enter highways from
the right via off-ramps. Because they are
often impaired, their movements are
unpredictable.
What to Do if You Encounter a Wrong-
Way Driver
▪ If you’re on a divided highway – like
I-17, SR 51, US 60 or any freeway in
Phoenix and all interstates – and you
see a vehicle coming toward you, slow
down by easing your foot off the gas.
▪ Make sure there’s no vehicle next to
you and steer away from the wrong-
way driver.
▪ Get to a safe place, call 911 and report
the wrong-way driver.
What to Do if You See a Message on
an Overhead Sign Warning of a
Wrong-Way Driver
▪ When ADOT is alerted to a possible
wrong-way driver, overhead messages
boards on that stretch of freeway will
display the message, “ALERT,
WRONG-WAY DRIVER AHEAD.”
▪ If you see that message, safely move
toward the nearest highway exit as
soon as possible.
What You Can Do Right Now
▪ Never drive distracted or impaired.
▪ Never let an impaired driver get
behind the wheel. Most wrong-way
crashes are caused by impaired
drivers. It's up to all of us to keep
impaired drivers off our roads.
▪ Have a plan in mind, so if you
encounter a wrong-way driver you
will not waste a moment to take
emergency evasive action that could
save your life.
Use of Alcohol, Marijuana and
Other Drugs
Impaired Driving
Alcohol, marijuana, medications, illegal drugs
and driving do not mix. A driver who drinks
and/or uses drugs can cause crashes, injuries
and death.
Driving is a serious business that requires
the ultimate in skill and judgment – both of
which are diminished through consumption
of alcohol or use of marijuana, medications
or illegal drugs. Prescription drugs and over-
the-counter medications for allergies and
colds can impair driving skills. Always check
medication labels for warnings about the
medications’ effects prior to driving.
Alcohol or use of drugs seriously reduces your
reflexes, physical control over the vehicle and
ability to recognize dangerous situations.
These combined physical effects make an
impaired driver a dangerous driver. Even when
you may not appear or feel impaired, alcohol
and/or the use of marijuana, medications
or illegal drugs produces a false sense of
confidence in your driving ability.
Open Container
It is illegal for a driver or passenger to
consume or possess an open container
of spirituous liquor in the passenger
compartment of a motor vehicle while on any
public roadway. Passengers riding in a bus,
limousine, taxi or the living area of a motor
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 46 of 57 --

47
home are exempt. Passenger compartment
includes any unlocked compartments or
portable devices within reach of the driver or
passenger. It does not include the trunk or
the area behind the last upright seat of a
vehicle not equipped with a trunk.
DO NOT DRINK
AND DRIVE!
Under 21 = ZERO Tolerance
License Suspension for Providing
Alcohol to Minors
Upon convicting a person of knowingly
purchasing for or providing spirituous liquor
to a minor, the court may direct MVD to
suspend the person’s driver license (driving
privilege) as follows:
▪ First conviction – a period of not more
than 30 days.
▪ Second or subsequent conviction – a
period of not more than six (6) months.
Road Rage and Aggressive
Driving
You may be cited for aggressive driving if you
commit a series of acts during a single,
continuous period of driving that presents
an immediate hazard to another person or
vehicle, exceed the posted speed limit and
commit two of the following violations:
Youthful drivers are substantially over
represented in motor vehicle crashes, as
compared to all other age groups. Alcohol
involvement in vehicle crashes reaches its
highest rate for those between the ages of 21
and 34. Further survey data indicates that adults
between the ages of 21 and 29 are the most
likely to drive after they have been drinking.
The consequences of driving under the
influence are getting tougher. Driving while
impaired is a crime.
The best way to avoid death, injury, penalties
and jail time is to practice Zero-Tolerance…No
Alcohol. If you are under 21, any trace of
alcohol, marijuana, medications or illegal
drugs that impair your ability to drive safely
will result in stiff penalties, and your license
will be suspended for 2 years. Remember,
being under the legal limit of 0.08 blood
alcohol concentration (BAC) does not mean
that it is legal or safe for you to drive and you
can still be arrested for driving under the
influence. Studies prove that alcohol impairs
a person's ability to drive at levels
substantially below 0.08 BAC.
▪ Failure to obey traffic control signs or
signals.
▪ Passing another vehicle on the right side.
▪ Unsafe lane change.
▪ Following too close.
▪ Failure to yield to emergency vehicles.
The penalties for aggressive driving are:
▪ First offense — You will be required
to attend a Traffic Survival School
course and your license may be
suspended for 30 days.
▪ Second and subsequent offenses —If
you commit a second offense within
24 months, you are guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor and your license will be
suspended for 12 months.
Emotions
You cannot drive well if you are angry, excited,
worried or depressed. Anger is the
emotion that probably occurs most often while
driving, especially in heavy traffic. Do not
allow your emotions to influence the
decisions you must make while driving. It is
best to wait until you are calm before
driving. Distracted driving may cause
crashes, injury, or death.
Physical Fitness
Health
Your physical, mental and emotional
conditions are more important than any
other potential problems you will face on the
road. Even a simple headache or cold could
affect your ability to drive safely. Be as
objective as possible about your fitness to
drive. Postpone your trip or have someone
else drive if you are ill.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 47 of 57 --

48
Medical Restrictions
Any condition that could affect the ability to
drive safely must be reported to MVD. A
person who has had a seizure within 90 days
of applying for a driver license is required to
report that medical condition to MVD. A
person who already has a driver license and
who has a seizure or other medical condition
is required to cease driving, notify MVD and
have a medical exam. The physician will
submit results to MVD.
Drowsy Driving/Fatigue
If you find yourself feeling sleepy while
driving, it is already past the time to get off
the road. Fatigue dulls the mind and reduces
your ability to act quickly and correctly. Five
groups of drivers have been identified as
at risk for crashes due to sleepiness: shift
workers, business travelers, commercial
drivers, those with sleep disorders and young
people. Drowsy driving/fatigue is an issue as
serious and perilous as driving under the
influence of alcohol, but not as detectable.
Rest is the only safe remedy. To avoid
fatigue, follow these guidelines:
▪ Get plenty of rest before you start on a
long trip.
▪ Avoid driving late at night.
▪ Take frequent rest stops, get out of the
vehicle and exercise, breathe deeply and
move around.
▪ Do not stare straight ahead, keep your
eyes moving, and check your mirrors
and dash gauges.
▪ Roll down the windows to get fresh air,
sing along with the radio, or chew gum.
▪ If possible, change drivers frequently.
Driver Improvement
Along with your Arizona driver license comes
the obligation to drive responsibly.
“Driver Improvement” refers to the process of
identifying those who are not driving
responsibly and either correcting their
behavior or removing their privilege to drive
in Arizona.
License Revocation
Revocation is the removal of your privilege to
drive. It is required by law, upon conviction of
certain driving offenses. Once your
revocation period has ended, your driving
privilege will remain revoked until an
investigation is completed. The investigation
is to determine that all withdrawal actions
have ended, and all statutory requirements
are met. You will be required to pay the
appropriate application fee and a $20
reinstatement fee, and you may be required
to file a Certificate of Insurance (commonly
known as an SR-22). A written vision and road
test may be required.
Your driving privilege will be revoked for, but
not limited to:
▪ Any homicide or aggravated assault
involving use of a vehicle.
▪ Any felony in which a vehicle is used.
▪ Perjury relating to the ownership or
operation of a vehicle.
▪ Failure to stop and render aid at the
site, if you are involved in a traffic crash.
▪ Two or more DUI convictions.
▪ Aggravated DUI (Driving while Under
the Influence of alcohol or drugs).
▪ Causing death or serious physical injury
by use of a vehicle.
Your driving privilege will be suspended for
two or more convictions for:
▪ Reckless driving.
▪ Racing on the highways.
In addition, your driving privilege may also be
revoked:
▪ For failure to take and pass a required
driving retest.
▪ If you are determined to be medically,
psychologically or physically incapable
of operating a motor vehicle.
▪ If continued operation of a motor
vehicle would endanger the public
health, safety or welfare.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 48 of 57 --

49
Vehicle Impound
A vehicle shall be impounded or immobilized
when any of the following apply:
▪ The person’s driving privilege is
suspended or revoked for any reason.
▪ The person has never been issued a
valid driver license or permit and the
person does not provide an out-of-
state driver license.
▪ The person is subject to an ignition
interlock device requirement and is
operating a vehicle without a functioning
certified ignition interlock device.
▪ The person is not in compliance with
Arizona’s financial responsibility
requirements, and;
▪ The person is driving a vehicle that is
involved in a crash that results in
either property damage or injury to or
death of another person.
6
Failure to stop for a traffic signal, stop sign
or to yield the right-of-way causing death
4
Failure to stop for a traffic signal, stop
sign or to yield the right-of-way causing
serious injury
Speeding 3
Driving over or parking in a gore area 	3
2
2
Wrong-way driving
All other moving violations
MVD may suspend or revoke your driving
privilege or require you to attend and
successfully complete an approved Traffic
Survival School (TSS) if you:
Suspension and Traffic School
Suspension is the temporary removal of your
driving privilege. It is an action that may be
taken after a review of your driving record or
when mandated/required by law. In addition to
the reinstatement fee, you must pay the
appropriate license application fee for your
age group.
Each time you are convicted or forfeit bail for
a moving traffic violation, points are assessed
against your permanent driving record. If you
accumulate 8 or more points within any 12-
month period, you are required to attend
Traffic Survival School (TSS), or your driving
privilege may be suspended.
Violation points are assessed as follows:
DUI
Extreme DUI
Reckless driving
Racing on highways
Aggressive driving
Aggravated DUI
Leaving the scene of a crash
8
8
8
8
8
8
6
▪ Have been convicted of running a red
light (or flashing red light). TSS is
mandatory in addition to paying all
court fines/fees.
▪ Have been convicted of frequent
serious offenses for violations of traffic
laws and a disregard for the safety of
others.
▪ Have been convicted of reckless driving
or are a repeat reckless or negligent
driver.
▪ Have committed or permitted an
unlawful or fraudulent use of your
driver license.
▪ Have been convicted of driving a motor
vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or toxic vapors.
▪ Have been arrested for refusal to take
or successfully complete a chemical
test (alcohol/drug content). The
penalty for refusal or unsuccessful
completion is a 12-month suspension
of your driver license, or 2 years for a
second or subsequent refusal within a
7-year period.
▪ Have an unresolved judgment from
another state.
▪ Have committed an offense for which
mandatory revocation of the driving
privilege is required upon conviction.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 49 of 57 --

50
Following the suspension or revocation
period of your license, you must pay the
appropriate application fee to reinstate your
license. In addition, you may be subject to
an investigation and you may be required to
file an SR-22 Certificate of Insurance.
Driving on a Suspended or Revoked
License
If you are cited for driving on a revoked or
suspended license, your vehicle may be
impounded by the law enforcement agency
for up to 30 days. If you are convicted of
driving on a suspended or revoked license,
you may be eligible for a restricted driver
license.
A person that is convicted of not having
or failing to produce evidence of current
financial responsibility within the vehicle shall
receive a suspension of the driving license,
vehicle registration and license plates (as
directed by the courts) for:
▪ Are under 21 and have been convicted
of receiving, consuming or possessing
alcohol.
▪ Are under 21 and have been convicted
of any illegal drug violation.
▪ Are medically unsafe to drive a motor
vehicle.
▪ Have been convicted as a driver in a
crash, resulting in death or personal
injury or serious property damage.
▪ Have been convicted of violating a
driver license restriction.
▪ Have failed to comply with a certified
Ignition Interlock Device order.
▪ Are under 18 and have been convicted
of your first moving civil traffic violation
or certain criminal traffic offenses.
▪ Have been convicted of wrong-way
driving on a controlled-access highway.
▪ 3 months for a first violation.
▪ 6 months for a second violation within
36 months.
▪ 1 year for a third or subsequent
violation within 36 months.
Failure to Appear or Pay Fine
for a Criminal Citation
Your driver license will be suspended if MVD
has been notified that you have not appeared
in court or have failed to pay a criminal traffic
violation charge. When you are cited for
a traffic violation, your signature on the
citation is a promise to appear in traffic court.
If you fail to appear in court, or fail to pay a
fine, the court will direct MVD to suspend your
driving privilege. If you are under 18, your
driving privilege may be suspended for failure
to appear in court, pay a fine or failure to
comply with any court order.
Traffic Ticket Enforcement
Arizona courts report to MVD any person who
is delinquent paying fines or penalties for civil
or criminal traffic/boating violations, or who
has failed to appear in a criminal traffic/
boating case. MVD is then required to update
the person’s record to prohibit the renewal of
any vehicle registrations with that person as
an owner.
Nitrous Oxide
If you are under 18, it is unlawful to use false
identification to cause a person to
sell, serve, give or furnish a nitrous oxide
container. These actions will result in your
driving privilege being suspended; you are also
subject to possible fines and/or a jail
sentence. Nitrous oxide is commonly known a
laughing gas and has a variety of uses,
including as an anesthetic by doctors and
dentists. It can also be addictive and long-term
use may cause severe medical problems or
death.
The suspension penalties are:
▪ First offense – Your driving privilege
will be suspended for 6 months.
▪ Second and subsequent offenses
– Your driving privilege will be
suspended for 12 months.
Altered or Fictitious License
It is unlawful to display any license that you
know is canceled, revoked, suspended,
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 50 of 57 --

51
fictitious or altered. It is also illegal to alter a
license or obtain a false driver license. These
actions will result in your driving privilege
being suspended. You are also subject to
possible fines and/or a jail sentence.
Driving Under the Influence
It is unlawful for any person who is under the
influence of alcohol, marijuana, medications
or illegal drugs to drive or be in actual
physical control of any vehicle.
When you apply for and accept the privilege
to drive a vehicle in Arizona, you give consent
to be tested for alcohol, marijuana,
medications and illegal drugs if you are
arrested for driving while under the influence
of intoxicating liquor or drugs (DUI). This is
known as the Implied Consent Law.
When a law enforcement officer has reason
to believe you have been driving while under
the influence, the officer will request that you
submit to a test of your blood, breath, urine
or other bodily substance to measure the
amount of alcohol or drugs present in your
bloodstream.
DUI Penalties
If you are stopped for driving under the
influence and a test shows that you have an
alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or
more (0.04 in a commercial vehicle requiring
a commercial driver license), you will lose
your driving privilege on the spot.
You may be found guilty of driving while
intoxicated even if the BAC was less than 0.08
percent. If you are under 21, your license may
be suspended if there is any alcohol
concentration.
If you refuse to submit to or do not
successfully complete any tests when you are
arrested for driving under the influence, you
will automatically lose your driving privilege
for 12 months, or 24 months for a second
refusal within 84 months.
▪ First offense – you will be jailed for
not less than 10 consecutive days,
your driver license will be suspended
for not less than 90 days, and you
will be assessed a fine of not less
than$1,250. You will also be required
to undergo alcohol screening/
education/treatment and will be
ordered to perform community
service and may be ordered to equip
any vehicle you operate with a
Certified Ignition Interlock Device.
▪ Second and subsequent offenses –
You will be jailed for not less than 90
days, fined not less than $3,000, and
your license will be revoked for 12
months. You will also be required to
undergo alcohol screening/
education/treatment and may be
ordered to equip any vehicle you
operate with a Certified Ignition
Interlock Device, and will be ordered
to perform community service.
Extreme DUI
This category of DUI applies to a person with
an alcohol concentration of 0.15 or higher.
▪ First offense – You will be jailed for
not less than 30 consecutive days and
fined not less than $2,500. If the
alcohol concentration is 0.20
or higher, you will be jailed not less
than 45 days and will not be eligible for
suspended sentence. You will also be
required to undergo alcohol screening/
education/treatment and will be
ordered to perform community service
and to equip any vehicle
you operate with a Certified Ignition
Interlock Device.
▪ Second and subsequent offenses –You
will be jailed for not less than 120 days,
fined not less than $3,250 and your
license will be revoked for 12 months.
If the alcohol concentration is 0.20 or
In addition to any criminal penalties
imposed by the court for a second or third
offense DUI violation, your driving privilege
will be automatically revoked.
DUI
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 51 of 57 --

52
higher, you will be jailed not less than 180
days and will not be eligible for
suspended sentence. You will also be
required to undergo alcohol screening/
education/treatment and to equip any
vehicle you operate with a Certified
Ignition Interlock Device, and will be
ordered to perform community service.
Aggravated DUI
This category of DUI applies to a person who
commits a DUI while their driving privilege is
suspended or revoked, commits a third DUI in
7 years, or commits a DUI while a person
under 15 is in the vehicle.
The aggravated DUI law also includes a violation
where a person who is subject to a Certified
Ignition Interlock Device requirement commits
a DUI or extreme DUI violation.
You will be sent to prison for not more
than 2 years and, in addition to any other
penalty required by law, your license will be
revoked for 1 year. You will also be required
to undergo alcohol screening/education/
treatment and to equip any vehicle you
operate with a Certified Ignition Interlock
Device.
Certified Ignition Interlock Device
A Certified Ignition Interlock Device is a breath
alcohol testing instrument connected to the
ignition and power system of the vehicle. The
driver blows into the device before attempting
to turn the ignition. If the driver’s alcohol level
is above a certain level, the vehicle will not
start. While the vehicle is in operation, the
driver must blow into the device at random
intervals.
Arizona law allows a person to apply for
Special Ignition Interlock Restricted Driver
License on day one of a suspension or
revocation of the person's Class D or Class G
driving privilege for most of the following:
▪ First offense for an Implied Consent
violation after 12/31/2022.
▪ Admin Per Se violation after
12/31/2022.
The person must comply with the Certified
Ignition Interlock Device requirements,
complete alcohol treatment classes when
required and carry proof of future financial
responsibility insurance.
Executive Hearing Office
The Executive Hearing Office conducts
hearings which have been requested by
individuals or businesses contesting an
Order issued by MVD. Although there are
many kinds of hearings, most involve an
appeal to an Order suspending or revoking
a driver license. Usually, the suspension or
revocation results from traffic law
violations.
Whenever you have the right to appeal an
Order, the notice of suspension/revocation
will inform you of the procedure to be
followed if you choose to request a
hearing. It is particularly important to file a
hearing request within the time required by
▪ After a minimum of 90 days for a
suspension or revocation for:
▪ First offense for an Implied Consent
violation before 1/1/2023.
▪ First offense for an Implied Consent
violation after 12/31/2023 involving
serious physical injury or fatality.
▪ Conviction of aggravated DUI or
extreme DUI with a minor in the
vehicle.
▪ Conviction of DUI or extreme DUI or
having spirituous liquor in the
person's body while operating a
motor vehicle while under 18 years of
age.
▪ Conviction of operating a motor
vehicle while 18 to 20 years of age
with spirituous liquor in the person's
body.
▪ During a revocation for two DUI's
withing 84 month period after a
minimum period of 45 days has been
served, and one of the violations is on
or after January 1, 2012.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 52 of 57 --

53
law. You may lose your right to the hearing
if you delay.
If you need additional information
concerning the hearing procedure, call the
Executive Hearing Office at 602.712.7737.
Remember, the law only allows the Executive
Hearing Office to provide general
information.. For more specific legal advice,
you might consider consulting an attorney.
Section 6
HANDLING EMERGENCIES
Skids, tire blowouts and mechanical failures
can happen at any time. You need to be
prepared to handle them.
The following recommendations are to assist
you with emergency situations.
Tire Failure
Reduce your chances of a blowout by
checking your tire pressure regularly. If a tire
blowout occurs:
▪ Hold the steering wheel tightly and
keep your vehicle going straight.
▪ Ease off the gas pedal; do not apply
the brakes.
▪ Let the vehicle slow down until it is
almost stopped.
have a fire extinguisher, a heavy blanket, a
heavy coat or sand can help to smother the
flames.
Fires are dangerous. If you have any
indication that the fire may be beyond
your control, get away from the vehicle.
Overheating
Steam coming from under your hood may
mean that your cooling system has
overheated. You should:
Just before your vehicle stops, activate your
turn signal to let other drivers know you are
moving to the side of the road, then pull off
the roadway and apply the brakes.
Fire
Fires are usually caused by a short circuit in
the electrical system. If you have a fire, pull
quickly off the road, shut off the ignition to
cut electrical power and get all passengers
away from the car. Call 911.
Always carry a fire extinguisher. An ABC rated
dry chemical extinguisher is best for vehicle
fires. Do not use water if gasoline is burning
since this will spread the flames. If you do not
▪ Pull to the side of the road and turn off
your engine immediately.
▪ Raise the hood but do not open the
radiator cap. Opening the radiator cap
while the engine is hot may allow steam
to escape and cause severe burns.
Carry extra water in your car to add to your
radiator if the engine overheats. Add water
only after the engine has cooled. Never
attempt to add water while the engine is hot!
Power Steering Failure
(Example: Your engine dies as you pull
around a corner).
▪ Firmly grip the steering wheel with
both hands to complete the turn and
move to the right side of the road.
▪ Stop the car; push the brakes extra
hard if your vehicle has power brakes.
Headlight Failure
▪ Try the high beam/low beam switch.
This may restore normal function.
▪ Turn the headlight switch on and off
several times.
▪ If neither of these steps work, put
on the parking lights, emergency
flashers or turn signals; pull to the
side of the road and stop.
Brake Failure
Many vehicles feature Anti-lock Braking
Systems (ABS). Do not pump anti-lock brakes.
If a vehicle does not have anti-lock brakes:
▪ Pump the brakes rapidly. This may build
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 53 of 57 --

54
Crashes
Avoiding a Crash
If you are stopped at a traffic light or stop sign
and another vehicle is approaching you from
behind at a high rate of speed, you should:
▪ If possible, pull your vehicle forward
in an effort to give the approaching
vehicle more room to stop.
▪ If the crash cannot be avoided, brace
yourself between the steering wheel
and the back of the seat and release
your brake an instant before impact.
This will help to lessen the impact.
If you are in danger from a potential head-on
crash, do one of the following:
▪ Reduce your speed and flash your
headlights and use your horn in an
effort to warn the other driver.
▪ Head for the shoulder and get off of the
road away from the oncoming driver.
▪ If you cannot avoid the crash, try to
maneuver your vehicle in such a way
as to lessen the severity of impact.
Always wear your safety belts. This is the best
thing you can do to protect yourself from
injury in the event of a crash.
Compromising
Another important defensive driving skill
is compromise. When you cannot separate
risks, and you must deal with two or more at
the same time, compromise by giving the
most room to either the greatest or most
likely danger. For example, if you are driving
on a two-lane street with oncoming cars to
your left and a child riding a bike to your right.
▪ Do not press on the brake any further;
this will only make the skid worse.
▪ Turn the wheel quickly in the direction
you want your vehicle to follow (in the
direction of the skid).
▪ As the car begins to straighten out,
turn the wheel quickly back the other
way so your vehicle does not skid in
the opposite direction.
▪ Continue turning the wheel back and
forth as necessary until your vehicle
straightens to its normal path.
Debris on the Road
Debris on the roadway is common in
Arizona. Pieces of blown tires, unsecured
materials falling off trucks, rocks falling onto
the road during a storm, and other debris
all pose hazards. Drivers need to be
constantly aware of their surroundings and
prepare for the unexpected. A common
crash related to debris is a driver swerving
to avoid the hazard, losing control of their
vehicle and leaving the roadway. In some
cases, driving over the debris would have
resulted in a much less severe incident.
That’s a decision you may have to make in a
fraction of a second. Stay constantly alert
and always be thinking ahead about what
you would do if you suddenly have debris
show up in front of you.
Animals on the Road
Animals large and small can do a lot of
damage to your vehicle or cause you to lose
control. Wildlife may dart onto the road in
unexpected locations. Livestock such as
cows and horses may be let onto the road
▪ up enough pressure to stop your vehicle.
▪ If pumping the brakes does not work,
slowly apply the parking brake. Be
sure to hold the brake release so you
can ease off the brake if the rear
wheels lock and the car begins to skid.
▪ Shift to lower gear and look for a safe
place to stop.
The hild is the most likely to move suddenly,
so you need a larger space cushion to the
right. In this case, moving closer to the center
line is the correct compromise.
Recovering from Skids
Driving on a slippery roadway surface or
braking too sharply can throw your vehicle
into a skid. When this occurs, there are
several actions to take:
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 54 of 57 --

55
by people leaving gates open or cutting
fences. If you encounter an animal on the
road, slow down as much as you can and
maneuver to avoid a direct crash without
losing control of your vehicle. If the animal is
not yet on the road, do not sound your horn,
as that may startle the animal and cause it to
run out in front of you. If you see an animal on
the road that is a hazard to traffic, call 911
and report it to law enforcement.
Crash Procedures
Reporting Crashes
If you are involved in a crash, you are to
remain at the scene to provide assistance to
any person injured and to exchange
information with the other drivers. You should
provide:
▪ Driver License number.
▪ Name and address.
▪ Insurance company name and policy
number.
▪ Information on witnesses of the crash.
▪ License plate numbers.
In case of injury, you are also required to
immediately call the police.
Assisting at the Scene of a Crash
If you are one of the first persons to come
upon the scene of a crash:
▪ Pull your vehicle off the road and
turn on your hazard flashers.
▪ Turn off the ignition of vehicles
involved in the crash.
▪ Notify emergency officials – call 911.
▪ Do not stand or walk in traffic lanes.
▪ Ask others who have stopped to warn
the approaching traffic.
In the event of a crash, provided there has
been no serious physical injury or fatality,
the vehicles involved in the crash shall be
removed from the main traveled portions of
the roadway. Any licensed driver may move
the vehicle as long as the vehicle is safely
operable (does not require towing and can
be operated under its own power) and the
movement does not cause further damage to
the vehicles or increase traffic hazards.
Any person who removes a motor
vehicle from the main traveled portion
of the roadway prior to the arrival of law
enforcement personnel shall not be held
liable or at fault for the crash based solely on
the fact the vehicle was moved.
Quick Clearance
In the event of a minor, non-injury crash,
drivers should get their vehicles, if they are
operable, out of travel lanes as soon as it’s
safe to do so.
State law requires a driver involved in a
minor crash without injuries to remove a
vehicle from the roadway if it is operable and
can be moved safely. Quickly moving your
vehicle out of travel lanes provides a safer
environment to inspect your car for damage.
Moving your vehicle to the emergency
shoulder, median or exiting the highway also
provides a safer environment for first
responders and keeps travel lanes clear for
other vehicles, reducing the chance of a
secondary crash.
If you are involved in a crash, the first action
to take is to make sure you and occupants in
your vehicle are OK. Then, if your vehicle is
operable, move to the emergency shoulder,
median or exit the highway and call 911. Stay
out of travel lanes, be alert and watch
approaching traffic. Remember: Never leave
the scene of a crash.
FENDER BENDER?
SAVE YOUR REAR AND QUICKLY CLEAR
Failure to Stop at a Crash
If you are a driver involved in a crash where
there is damage to a vehicle, injury or death,
you are required by law to stop your vehicle
and remain at the scene of the crash:
▪ Provide aid to any injured person,
including making arrangements for
medical treatment by calling 911.
▪ Provide your name, address and
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 55 of 57 --

56
Conviction for failure to stop will result in
your driving privilege being:
▪ Suspended for 1 year if involving only
damage to a vehicle.
▪ Revoked for 3 years if involving injury
other than death or serious physical
injury.
▪ Revoked for 5 years, not including the
time you are incarcerated, if involving
a serious physical injury.
▪ Revoked for 10 years, not including
the time you are incarcerated, if
involving a death.
license plate number to emergency
providers and law enforcement.
Section 7
LAW ENFORCEMENT
This guidance was approved by the American
Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators,
the International Association of Chiefs of
Police, the National Association of Women
Law Enforcement Executives, the National
Organization of Black Law Enforcement
Executives, and the National Sheriffs’
Association. Revised: January 2023
Traffic Stop Safety
Law Enforcement officers are responsible for
conducting traffic stops when they have
reasonable suspicion of a traffic violation or
a criminal violation. Being stopped by an
officer can be a stressful experience for the
driver, any passengers, and for the officer,
too. Knowing what to do during the stop will
help ensure your safety and the safety of
others.
When you see emergency lights behind you,
it is important for you and your passengers
to stay calm and cooperate.
Remember to:
▪ Activate your turn signal and pull off
or to the side of the roadway as soon
as it is safe to do so.
▪ Turn off the engine and any audio
devices.
▪ Stay in your vehicle unless directed
by the officer to exit.
▪ Turn on your interior lights if you are
pulled over at night to assist with
visibility. Officers may use a spotlight
for additional visibility.
▪ Keep your hands on the steering
wheel or in a visible location so they
are easily observable.
▪ Follow all instructions the officer
gives you or your passengers.
The officer may approach either side of the
vehicle. When the officer approaches the
vehicle, remember to:
▪
▪
Lower the corresponding window so
you and the officer can better
communicate.
Let the officer know if you have a
weapon in the vehicle upon first
contact.
▪ Wait for the officer’s instructions
before reaching for your driver’s
license or vehicle documents.
When conducting the stop, the officer will
typically:
▪ Explain why you were stopped/ask
questions about your trip.
▪ Ask for your driver’s license, proof of
insurance, and vehicle registration. If
the documents are out of your reach,
tell the officer where they are and
wait for the officer’s acknowledgment
before reaching to retrieve the
documents.
▪ Show their law enforcement
credentials if they are not in uniform.
If they do not show their credentials,
you may ask to see them.
In some cases, the officer may:
▪ Ask you to exit the vehicle. In this
case, keep your hands visible, exit the
vehicle, and stand in a location as
directed by the officer.
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 56 of 57 --

▪ Applying for a Title and Registration
▪ 90-Day Resident Registration
▪ Temporary Registrations
▪ What to do after you sell a vehicle
▪ License plate credit and how to
apply for a refund
▪ Vehicle Inspections
▪ Emission Testing
▪ Vehicle Insurance
▪ Registration Compliance Program
▪ Alternative Fuel Vehicles (AFV)
Please visit the ADOT website at
azdot.gov for information on:
If you have questions, respectfully ask
the officer to clarify. If you disagree
with the officer’s decision or course of
action, do not prolong the contact by
arguing with the officer. Rather, you may
seek to contest the decision in court
through established legal channels. Your
acceptance and signature on a traffic
ticket is not an admission of guilt.
However, the refusal to sign a traffic
ticket may result in your arrest.
If you believe the officer
acted inappropriately or have questions
regarding their conduct you may call or
contact the officer’s agency and request
to speak to a supervisor. This is best
done as soon as possible after the stop.
Following these procedures can help make
a traffic stop a safe experience for all
parties involved.
Scan the QR code for safety video
Always Be Prepared
Consider packing an emergency kit containing
all or some of the items listed below:
▪ Water containers/drinking water
▪ Fire extinguisher
▪ First Aid kit
▪ Sunglasses
▪ Non-perishable food
▪ Can opener
▪ Flashlight
▪ Blankets
▪ Gloves
▪ Maps
▪ Paper towels
▪ Tire chains
▪ Gasoline can
▪ Rope
▪ Electrical tape
▪ Flares
▪ Jumper cables
▪ Absorbent cloths
▪ Mirror
▪ Motor oil
▪ Note pad and pencil
▪ Jack, lug wrench and spare tire
▪ Hand tools (screwdriver, pliers, wrenches)
Arizona Department of Transportation
▪ Take any one of many possible
actions, including but not limited
to, issuing a warning, issuing a
traffic ticket, or making an arrest.
The officer will typically explain
whatever action is being taken. If
they do not, you may ask them to
do so.
Arizona Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Division
azdot.gov
99-0117 R02/26
ARIZONA DRIVER LICENSE MANUAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE GUIDE

-- 57 of 57 --