ARKANSAS DRIVER LICENSE
STUDY GUIDE
VOLUME 1 – EDITION 10
January 2026
0122202
6

-- 1 of 98 --

LITTERING:
IT’S AGAINST THE LAW.
With a driver license comes the responsibility of being familiar with
the laws of the road. As a driver you are accountable for what may
be thrown from the vehicle onto a city street or state highway.
8-6-404 PENALTIES
(a)(1)(A)(i) A person convicted of a violation of § 8-6-406 or § 8-6-407 for a first
offense shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be fined in an
amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000). (ii) An additional sentence of not more than eight (8) hours of
community service shall be imposed under this subdivision (a) (1) (A).
(B)(i) A person convicted of a violation of § 8-6-406 or § 8-
6-407 for a second or subsequent offense within three (3)
years of the first offense shall be guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount of not less
than two hundred dollars ($200) and not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000).
(ii) An additional sentence of not more than twenty-four
(24) hours of community service may be imposed under this
subdivision (a) (1) (B).
(2) In addition to those penalties, any violator may also be
required to remove litter from alongside highways and at
other appropriate locations for any prescribed period.
(b) Any person who violates § 8-6-406 or § 8-6-407 and
who is found to have committed the prohibited acts in
furtherance of or as a part of a commercial enterprise,
whether or not that enterprise is the disposal of wastes,
shall be guilty of commercial littering and shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor. Additionally, those convicted may be
required to remove any litter disposed of in violation of this
subchapter. (c) Any person who violates any provision of § 8-
6-408 shall be guilty of:
(1) An unclassified misdemeanor for a first offense and
shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000) and sentenced
to one hundred (100) hours of community service; and
(2) A Class A misdemeanor for a second or subsequent
offense.
(d)(1) All or any portion of the fines, community service, and
imprisonment penalties provided by this section may be
suspended by the judge if the violator agrees to remove
litter from alongside highways and at other appropriate
locations for a prescribed period.
(e) In addition to all other penalties, any person convicted
of a violation of § 8-6-406 or § 8-6-407 who fails to pay any
fines assessed in accordance with the findings and orders
of the court shall have his or her driver's license suspended
for six (6) months by the Department of Finance and
Administration, upon receipt of an order of denial of driving
privileges from the court pursuant to this section.
8-6-407 COMMERCIAL REFUSE HAULING BY
UNCOVERED VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commercial
or for-hire hauling to operate any truck or other vehicle
within this state to transport litter, trash, or garbage unless
the vehicle is covered to prevent its contents from blowing,
dropping, falling off, or otherwise departing from the vehicle.
In addition, any person operating his own truck or other
vehicle to transport litter, trash, or garbage shall take
reasonable steps to prevent its contents from blowing,
dropping, falling off, or otherwise departing from the vehicle.
However, no vehicle hauling predominately metallic material
shall be required to be covered if it is loaded in a manner
which will prevent the material from falling or dropping from
the vehicle.
8-6-408 DISCARDING CERTAIN ITEMS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be
placed any junk motor vehicle, old vehicle tire, or
inoperative or abandoned household appliance, or part
thereof, upon the right-of-way of any public highway, upon
any other public property, or upon any private property
which he does not own, lease, rent, or otherwise control,
unless it is at a salvage yard, a permitted disposal site, or at
the business establishment of a demolisher.
8-6-409 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE AGAINST DRIVERS
If the throwing, dumping, or depositing of litter was done
from a motor vehicle, except a motor bus, it shall be prima
facie evidence that the throwing, dumping, or depositing
was done by the driver of the motor vehicle.

-- 2 of 98 --

What To Do When You Are Stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer
The steps outlined below provide drivers with basic information about what to do when stopped by a
law enforcement officer or when passing a law enforcement officer stopped alongside a roadway to
ensure the officer’s safety and the safety of the driver and any passengers.
1. 	Pull over to the right side of the road – activate your turn signal to indicate to the officer that you
are seeking a safe place to stop.
2. 	If you are unsure, you are being stopped by an actual police officer, activate your turn signal, pull
to the nearest well-lit location, dial 9-1-1, and request a police officer confirmation.
3. 	Pull to the closest safest spot out of the traffic lane (Do not stop on bridges or overpasses).
4. 	Remain in the vehicle unless instructed to exit by the officer.
5. 	Ensure that both hands are visible to the officer as he or she approaches (ex: always place your
hands at the top of the steering wheel) during the stop.
6. 	Do not make any sudden movements while looking for your documents throughout the stop.
7. 	If you are stopped at night, turn on the interior lights, so that the officer can see you more clearly.
8. 	Turn off the radio, put down any mobile devices, and give the officer your full attention during
the stop.
9. 	The officer should introduce himself or herself by name, the agency he or she represents, and tell
you the reason for the stop (A.C.A. § 12-12-1403).
10. 	In accordance with Arkansas laws (A.C.A. §§ 27-22-104, 27-16-601, and 27-14-714), you are
required to provide your driver’s license, proof of insurance, and vehicle registration when
requested by the officer.
11. 	Inform the officer where the documents are located and ask before reaching to retrieve them.

-- 3 of 98 --

12. 	Be sure to inform the officer if there is a weapon in the vehicle, the type of weapon, and the
location. You should not reach for the weapon. Always follow the instructions of the officer
concerning any weapon inside the vehicle.
13. 	If you have a concealed carry permit, present it to the officer with your driver’s license.
14. 	The officer may approach the driver’s side or the passenger side of the vehicle. Do not be
alarmed. The officer will approach in the safest manner possible.
15. 	Be courteous to the officer, even if you disagree with his or her actions.
16. 	If you wish to contest a citation, you should contact the court listed on the citation. Do not argue
with the officer on the side of the road.
17. 	You may be required to sign a citation. Signing a citation is not an admission of guilt. It is a
promise to appear in court at the designated time or to pay the fine before the court date. Failure
to sign a citation, if required, may result in a physical arrest, and require you to post a bond prior
to release. This may also result in your vehicle being impounded.
18. 	If you observe a traffic stop that does not involve you, do not approach the officer.
19. 	If you are passing an officer or other authorized vehicle stopped on the side of the road, Arkansas
Law (A.C.A. § 27-51-310) requires that you move to the farthest lane or position away from the
authorized vehicle as you pass. If it is unsafe or not possible to change lanes, then the law requires
you to reduce your speed as you pass. In all cases, the driver shall exercise due caution.
Following these tips doesn’t mean you won’t get a citation, but it does mean you are doing what you
can for the safety of the public and the law enforcement officers that you may encounter.

-- 4 of 98 --

Visit: https://telegov.egov.com/aspdlskills to schedule your appointment.

-- 5 of 98 --

Definitions of Appointment Types:
1. 	Driver’s License/Motorcycle Instruction Permit Test- This appointment type will allow you to schedule a
driver’s license exam to obtain an instruction permit OR a motorcycle exam to obtain an “M” endorsement.
If you are a non-U.S. Citizen and have immigration documents, please select this appointment type. This
will allow you more time with the examiner. Note: Not all locations will offer this immigration
documents feature.
2. 	Driver’s License Test for Learning Differences- This appointment type will allow you to schedule an oral
test with an examiner. Note: Not all locations will offer this feature.
3. 	Driver’s License and Motorcycle Skills Test- This is the driving portion of the exam. You must have an
Instruction Permit before scheduling. Motorcycles- You must have a completed Knowledge Exam and your
motorcycle must be transported to the testing center or driven by a person with an “M” endorsement.
4. 	Motorcycle Skills Exam (Fort Smith and Warren)- This is the driving portion of the exam. You must have a
completed Knowledge Exam and your motorcycle must be transported to the testing center or driven by a
person with an “M” endorsement.
5. 	Commercial Skills Exam- Schedule your Commercial Skills Test
6. 	Commercial Driver’s License Knowledge Applicants- This appointment type will allow you to schedule the
Commercial Driver’s License Knowledge Exams.

-- 6 of 98 --

Table of Content
INTRODUCTION 	1
THE DRIVER’S LICENSE 	2
Types of Graduated Licenses 	3
• 	Instruction Permit 	3
• 	Learner’s License 	3
• 	Intermediate License 	3
• 	Class D License 	4
• 	Class M (Motorcycle) License 	4
• 	Class MD (Motor driven Cycle) License 	4
• 	Motorized Bicycle Certificate 	5
Vision Requirements 	5
Countries Exempt from Testing 	5
ACCEPTED IDENTIFICATION LIST 	6
Applicants Age 18 and Older 	6
• 	Primary Documents
• 	Secondary Documents
Applicants Under Age 18 	7
• 	Signature of Parent or Legal Guardian 	7
• 	ASP-33 Parent Affidavit and Financial Responsibility and Acceptance 	7
Chapter 1: Arkansas Law 	9
Arkansas Seat Belt Law 	9
Child Passenger Protection Act 	9
Protection from Secondhand Smoke 	9
Arkansas Law on Littering 	10
Unattended Children and Pets 	10
Move Over Law 	11
School Bus Law and Rules 	12
AR Governor’s Commission on People with Disabilities 	14
Approaching a Law Enforcement Vehicle with Emergency Lights Turned On 	15

-- 7 of 98 --

Chapter 2: Arkansas Rules and Regulations 	16
Construction/Maintenance/Work Zone Safety 	16
• 	Work Zone Questions and Answers 	20
Traffic Control Signals, Signs, and Pavement Markings 	23
• 	Lighted Traffic Signals 	23
• 	Flashing Lights 	24
• 	Lighted Arrows 	24
Right on Red Rule 	25
Traffic Control Signs 	25
• 	Stop Signs 	25
• 	Speed Limit Signs 	25
• 	Do Not Enter Sign 	26
• 	Yield Sign 	26
• 	Slow Moving Vehicle Sign 	26
Roadway Signs 	27
• 	Warning Signs 	27
Regulation Signs 	27
Railroad Crossing Signs 	28
• 	Round Yellow Advance Warning Sign 	28
• 	Pavement Markings 	28
• 	Cross Buck Sign 	28
• 	Gates and Lights 	29
• 	Emergency Notification Systems at Highway-Rail Grade Crossings 	29
• 	Railroad Exempt Sign 	29
• 	Multiple Tracks 	30
• 	Safety Tips 	30
Chapter 3: General Driving 	31
Lanes of Traffic 	31
• 	Pavement Markings 	31
• 	Fog Line and Lane Lines 	31
• 	White Lane Markings 	31
• 	Yellow Lane Markings 	31
• 	Shared Center Lane 	32
• 	Unmarked Lanes 	32
• 	General Driving 	32
• 	Passing 	32
• 	Turning 	33
o 	Right Turns 	33
o 	Left Turns 	33

-- 8 of 98 --

Multiple Lanes 	34
Cross Walks and Stop Lines 	34
Right of Way 	35
• 	Intersections 	35
o 	Pedestrians 	35
o 	Left Turns 	35
• 	Roundabouts 	36
o 	What is a Roundabout? 	37
o 	How to Navigate Roundabouts 	38
• 	Right of Way at Stop Signs 	39
• 	General Right of Way Rules 	40
o 	Passing 	40
Parking 	41
• 	Parking Tips 	41
• 	No Parking Zones 	41
• 	Do Not Park 	42
• 	Restricted Parking Zones 	42
Chapter 4: Safe Driving 	43
• 	Operating the Motor Vehicle 	43
o 	Seat Belt 	43
o 	Acceleration 	44
o 	Steering the Vehicle 	44
o 	Monitor Vehicle Speed 	44
o 	Stopping 	44
• 	Distracted Driving 	45
o 	What is Distracted Driving? 	45
o 	Dangerous Distractions 	46
o 	Distracted Driving Law 	46
o 	Take the Pledge 	47
• 	Stay Alert 	48
o 	Looking Ahead 	48
o 	Intersections 	48
o 	Looking Behind 	49
• 	Changing Lanes 	49
o 	Blind Spots 	50
o 	Slowing 	50
o 	Backing 	50

-- 9 of 98 --

Chapter 5: See and Be Seen 	51
• 	External Vehicle Lights 	51
• 	High and Low Beam Headlights 	51
• 	Warning Horn 	52
• 	Emergency Flashers 	52
• 	Let Other Drivers Know Your Intentions 	53
o 	Signaling to Change Directions 	53
• 	Adjusting the Vehicle Speed 	54
o 	Adjust to Road Conditions 	54
o 	Curves 	54
o 	Adjust to Slippery Roads 	55
o 	Adjust to Water Over the Roadway 	55
• 	Adjusting to the Flow of Traffic 	56
o 	Keeping Pace 	56
o 	Merging with Traffic 	56
o 	Exiting Traffic 	56
o 	Slow-Moving Traffic 	57
o 	Trouble Spots 	57
• 	Visibility and Reaction 	58
o 	Darkness 	58
o 	Rain, Fog, or Snow 	58
o 	Hill and Curves 	58
o 	Parked Vehicles 	58
o 	Sight-Distance Rule 	58
o 	Speed Limits 	58
• 	Distance and Reaction 	59
o 	Following Distance 	59
o 	Slippery Roads 	59
o 	The Driver Behind You Wants to Pass 	59
o 	Following Motorcycles 	59
o 	Following Drivers Who Cannot See Your Vehicle 	59
o 	Towing 	59
o 	Poor Visibility 	59
o 	Following Emergency Vehicles 	59
o 	Approaching Railroad Crossings 	59
o 	Stopping on an Incline 	59

-- 10 of 98 --

• 	The Safety Cushion 	60
o 	Traffic to the Rear 	60
o 	Traffic to the Side 	60
o 	Merging 	61
o 	Intersecting Traffic 	61
o 	Passing Distance 	61
o 	Oncoming Vehicles 	62
o 	Hills and Curves 	62
o 	Intersections 	62
o 	Lane Obstructions 	63
• 	Left Lane on a Multilane Highway for Passing Only (Subject to Change) 	63
Chapter 6: Tractor Trailer Rigs 	64
• 	Braking 	64
• 	Turning 	64
• 	Avoiding the Tractor Trailer “No-Zone” 	65
• 	Maneuverability 	66
Chapter 7: Sharing the Road with Bicycles and Motorcycles 	67
• 	Safety Tips for Motor Vehicle Drivers 	67
• 	Residential Areas Are Danger Zones 	68
• 	Lane Positions for Bicycles 	68
• 	Bicycle Hand Signals 	68
• 	Sharing the Road with Motorcyclists 	69
• 	Signal Your Intentions 	70
• 	Respect a Motorcycle 	70
• 	Allow Plenty of Space When Following a Motorcycle 	70
Chapter 8: Driving Fitness 	71
• 	Vision 	71
o 	Peripheral Vision 	71
o 	Judging Distance and Speed 	71
o 	Night Vision 	71
• 	Hearing 	71
• 	Fatigue 	72
• 	Health 	72
o 	Epilepsy 	72
o 	Diabetes 	72
o 	Heart Condition 	72
o 	Emotional Distress 	72

-- 11 of 98 --

• 	Drinking and Driving 	73
o 	Alcohol Impairment 	73
o 	Body Metabolism 	74
o 	Alcohol and the Law 	74
o 	Other Types of Drugs and Driving 	75
o 	Arkansas Organ and Tissue Donor Information 	76
Chapter 9: Emergencies 	77
• 	Vehicle Emergencies 	77
o 	Brake Failure 	77
o 	Blowouts 	77
o 	Engine Failure 	77
o 	Headlight Failure 	77
o 	Faulty Accelerator 	77
• 	Avoiding Collisions 	78
o 	Stopping 	78
o 	Turning 	78
o 	Accelerating 	78
o 	Skids 	79
• 	Traffic Crashes 	80
o 	Assisting the Injured 	81
o 	Keep a Record of Crash Information 	81
Chapter 10: Skills Test Guidelines 	82
• 	Inspecting Your Vehicle 	82
o 	Vehicle Seats 	82
o 	Vehicle Mirrors 	82
o 	Braking System 	83
o 	Lights 	83
o 	Windshield and Wipers 	83
o 	Tires 	84
o 	Steering System 	84
o 	Exhaust System 	84
o 	Engine 	84
o 	Horn 	84
• 	Preparing for the Skills Exam 	85
• 	Vehicle Inspection 	85
• 	Performance Guidelines 	85
o 	Vehicle Controls 	85
o 	Road Test 	85
o 	1-2-3 Skills Checklist 	86

-- 12 of 98 --

1
INTRODUCTION
This study guide offers information about Arkansas rules of the road and how to apply safe driving
practices. When the rules for safe driving practices are followed this manual will serve not only as the
foundation to help you become a good driver; but also, help you prepare and pass the knowledge and
skill (driving portion) part of the exams.
Be sure to read the driver’s manual carefully. The more you are familiar with the information within the
guide, the higher your chances of passing the knowledge exam and skills test. Reading the manual will
inform you of the documents needed to test.
The Arkansas State Police is not associated with third-party websites offering practice tests. However, the
Arkansas State Police does offer a testing APP (AR Driver Testing) found in the Google Play Store or
Apple APP Store.
ACT 1289 of 2015
THIS ACT REQUIRES A $5.00 FEE FOR EACH WRITTEN EXAMINATION. THERE SHALL
BE NO LIMIT TO THE NUMBER OF EXAMS CHARGED AT THE TIME OF LICENSE.
THE FEE WILL BE ADDED TO THE COST OF YOUR DRIVER’S LICENSE AND COLLECTED
BY THE ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE & ADMINISTRATION.
THE EXAM FEE SHALL BE SEPARATE FROM THE DUPLICATE FEE.

-- 13 of 98 --

2
THE DRIVER’S LICENSE
Anyone who operates a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or motorized bicycle on public
highways in Arkansas is required to have a license or certificate. Drivers are required to have an Arkansas
driver’s license if they have moved into the state for more than six (6) months as a non-resident or within
thirty (30) days of becoming a resident.
Proof of Residency:
27-16-606. When residents and nonresidents to obtain state registration and license.
(a) Within thirty (30) calendar days of becoming a resident, any person who is a resident of this state
shall obtain an Arkansas driver’s license in order to drive upon the streets and highways of this
state.
(b) Any nonresident who has been physically present in this state for a period of six (6) months shall
obtain an Arkansas driver’s license in order to drive upon the streets and highways of this state.
The following individuals can drive on Arkansas streets and roadways provided they have a valid license
from another state or an individual, who is at least sixteen years old.
• 	Military – Members of the Armed Forces on active duty, or
members of foreign military on temporary duty with the U.S. Armed
Forces. Act 235 of 2005 permits U.S. military spouses to obtain an
Arkansas Driver’s License without testing if the spouse has held a
driver’s license expired while residing outside the United States.
• 	Student – Students attending classes who are considered non-
residents under rules regulating the payment of tuition. Examples:
College or Exchange Students
An individual may obtain a driver’s license if:
• 	You are at least fourteen (14) years of age (restricted license)
• 	You are at least eighteen (18) years of age (non-restricted license)
• 	You can submit proof of name, residential address, and date of birth.
• 	You have a parent or legal guardian to consent, if under eighteen (18) years of age.
• 	You pass a driver’s knowledge and skills test.
• 	You have a valid hard copy driver’s license from another state. Cannot be expired for more than
thirty (30) calendar days.
• 	You are not suspended or revoked or expired or denied in whole or in part by Arkansas or any
other state, or one year has passed from any revocation.
• 	You legally reside within the United States
• 	You have not been judged by a court to be mentally incompetent, an alcoholic, or a habitual user
of illegal narcotics.
• 	You have no judgments pending for a moving traffic violation.

-- 14 of 98 --

3
TYPES OF GRADUATED DRIVER’S LICENSES
On July 1, 2001, Arkansas implemented a graduated driver’s license program. This program was designed
to allow drivers to gradually become safe and experienced drivers while continuing the learning process
of driving on our streets and highways. For further information on the graduated license, program contact
the Arkansas Department of Finance & Administration, Office of Driver Services at (501)682-7059 or
http://www.arkansas.gov/dfa/.
Instruction Permits (except Motorcycle), Learner’s Licenses, Intermediate Licenses, and Class D Licenses
may operate an automobile or other four-wheel vehicle with a gross weight rating (GVWR) under 26,001
pounds. Any vehicle designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers or transport “hazardous
material” must have a Commercial License. For more information, please refer to the Arkansas
Commercial Driver License Manual or visit the Arkansas State Police website at
https://static.ark.org/eeuploads/asp/cdl_manual_2003.pdf.
Instruction Permit- An individual who does not have an Arkansas driver’s license must obtain an Arkansas
instruction permit to practice their driving skills. The applicant with an instruction permit may drive with a
licensed driver twenty-one (21) years of age or older, who is occupying a seat beside the driver.
To apply for an instruction permit, the applicant must be at least fourteen (14) years of age. The applicant
must pass the knowledge exam and vision test to receive the instruction permit. The permit will be issued
for 2 (two) years from the date of the passed knowledge exam. All passengers riding in a motor vehicle
with a driver who has an instruction permit must wear seat belts.
Learner’s License- This is a restricted license issued to persons between fourteen (14) and sixteen (16)
years of age. To receive a Learner’s License, the applicant must have a valid Instruction Permit
indicating completion of the knowledge exam, vision, and skills test. Upon completion, the applicant will
return to any Arkansas Revenue Office to receive the Learner’s License. This license will be restricted
until the applicant’s sixteenth (16th) birthday AND the six (6) months of restricted driving is complete.
A person operating a motor vehicle with a Learner’s License must be accompanied by a licensed driver
who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and all passengers must wear seat belts. The use of a cell
phone, whether it is talking or texting, is prohibited by law except for an emergency. The applicant cannot
be involved in any traffic crash or be convicted of a serious traffic violation within the preceding six (6)
months prior to application.
Intermediate License- This license is a restricted license issued to persons between sixteen (16) and
eighteen (18) years of age. To receive an Intermediate License, the applicant must have a valid Instruction
Permit indicating completion of the knowledge exam, vision, and skills test. Upon completion, the
applicant will return to any Arkansas Revenue Office to receive the Intermediate License. The applicant
will be restricted for six (6) months from the date of permit issuance or until the applicant’s sixteenth
(16th) birthday, if the six months have been met when the applicant turns sixteen (16), no restriction will
be applied to the Intermediate License. A person operating a motor vehicle with a restricted Intermediate
License must be accompanied by a licensed driver who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age until the
restricted time is complete, and all passengers must wear seat belts. The period of restricted time is
recorded on the reverse side of the driver’s license. The use of a cell phone, whether it is talking or
texting, is prohibited by law except for an emergency.

-- 15 of 98 --

4
A driver with an intermediate license shall not operate a motor vehicle with more than one (1) unrelated
minor passenger unless accompanied by a licensed driver twenty-one (21) years or older, who is
occupying the front seat of a motor vehicle. A driver with an intermediate driver’s license cannot operate
a motor vehicle between the hours of 11:00 pm and 4:00 am unless accompanied by a licensed driver
twenty-one (21) years of age or older, driving to and from a school activity, church activity, job, or an
emergency.
Class D License- This is a non-restricted license issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older. To
receive a Class D License, the applicant must have a valid Instruction Permit indicating completion of the
knowledge exam, vision, and skills test. Upon completion, the applicant will return to any Arkansas
Revenue Office to receive the Class D License.
A Class D driver who is at least eighteen (18) but less than twenty-one (21) years of age may use a hands-
free wireless telephone or device for interactive communication while driving. A hand-held wireless
telephone can only be used for emergencies. Text messages are not allowed regardless of age.
Class M (Motorcycle) License- This license is a non-restricted motorcycle license issued to persons
sixteen (16) years of age or older to operate a motorcycle on public roadways. To receive a Class M
License, the applicant must complete: (1) a knowledge exam for a driver’s license if no driver’s license
and (2) a motorcycle knowledge exam. The applicant must pass a vision test and a motorcycle skills
exam. Upon completion, the applicant will return to any Arkansas Revenue Office to receive the Class M
(Motorcycle) License. Applicants with a valid Class D License must complete a motorcycle knowledge
exam, a vision test, and a motorcycle skill exam.
The motorcycle skill exam can be waived with the successful completion of a Motorcycle Safety
Foundation Riders Course. The certificate received must be returned to an Arkansas State Police
Examiner within ninety (90) days of course completion.
All applicants between the ages of sixteen (16) to seventeen (17) must submit an original birth certificate,
and a parent or legal guardian to sign the application. The knowledge exam will be valid for (one) year.
Class MD (Motor Driven Cycles) - This license is a restricted license issued to persons between fourteen
(14) and sixteen (16) years of age. To receive a Class MD License, the applicant must complete two
knowledge exams: (1) a knowledge exam for a driver’s license, no skills required) and (2) a motorcycle
knowledge exam. The applicant must pass a vision test and a motorcycle skills exam. Upon completion,
the applicant will return to any Arkansas Revenue Office to receive the Class MD (Motor Driven)
License. The MD License is restricted to operating motorcycles displacing 250 cubic centimeters or less.
The knowledge exam is valid for 1 (one) year.
The motor-driven skill exam can be waived with the successful completion of a Motorcycle Safety
Foundation Riders Course. The certificate received must be returned to an Arkansas State Police
Examiner within ninety (90) days of course completion.

-- 16 of 98 --

5
Motorized Bicycle (MB) Certificate- This is a restricted certificate issued to persons between the ages of
fourteen (14) and sixteen (16) years of age as of July 27, 2011. A Motorized Bicycle Certificate restricts
the operation of a motorized bicycle or motorcycle displacing fifty (50) centimeters or less. To receive a
Motorized Bicycle Certificate, if the applicant does not hold a valid Class D, he/she must complete two
knowledge exams: (1) a knowledge exam for a driver’s license, (no skills required) and (2) a motorcycle
knowledge exam. The applicant must pass a vision test and a motorcycle skills exam.
A person possessing a Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, Intermediate, Learner’s, Class M, or Class MD
License can legally operate a motorized bicycle or motorcycle displacing fifty (50) cubic centimeters or less.
VISION REQUIREMENTS
Vision Requirements- Arkansas Code Annotated §27-16-704 (b)(3)(4)(5)(6) requires that every applicant
pass a vision test before issuance of a driver's license or instruction permit. A minimum uncorrected
visual acuity of 20/40 is required for an unrestricted license, or a minimum corrected visual acuity of
20/70 is required for a restricted license (must wear glasses or contact lenses when driving). Also, your
field of vision must be 140º for a person with two (2) functional eyes or 105º for a person with one (1)
functional eye.
A vision test and a vision referral (ASP-90) will be valid for one (1) year from the date the test was
administered.
COUNTRIES EXEMPT FROM TESTING
Countries Exempt from Testing: The following countries are not required to test due to a reciprocal
agreement with these countries and may be issued an Arkansas Driver’s License. The applicant must be
referred to the Department of Finance and Administration for further assistance.
EXEMPT COUNTRIES:
Manitoba, Canada
Germany
France
Taiwan
South Korea

-- 17 of 98 --

6
ACCEPTED IDENTIFICATION LIST
Arkansas State Police Driver’s Testing
1-2-3 Checklist – AGE 18 AND OLDER
Effective: May 20, 2025
Before a written driver’s license can begin, applicants over
the age of eighteen (18) must have these three (3) items:
Two Primary Documents; OR One Primary and One Secondary:
Accepted Primary Documents:
• 	U.S. Original or Certified Birth Certificate (No Foreign Birth Certificates are accepted)
• 	Original Birth Abroad Certificate (No Laminated, Scanned or Photocopied Documents)
• 	Employment Authorization Card (with Social Security Card)
• 	Foreign Passport (with U.S. Visa and I-94, can be printed online:
https://i94.cbp.dhs.gov/home
• 	INS Certificate of Citizenship (N-560, N-561, or N-645)
• 	INS Naturalization Certificate (N-550, N-570, or N-578)
• 	INS Permanent Resident Card (I-551, I-151, AR-3, AR-3A, or AR-103)
• 	U.S. Passport or U.S. Passport Card
• 	Photo INS Document (No Border Crossing Cards)
Accepted Secondary Documents:
• 	Arkansas State ID or Valid Out-of-State ID
• 	Current Arkansas School Identification Card
• 	Arkansas Vehicle Registration and/or Title
• 	Bureau of Indian Affairs/Indian Treaty Card (No Tribal Cards)
• 	U.S. Marriage Certificate or Marriage License
• 	IRS Tax Return (W-2 Form is not acceptable) within the last 2 years
• 	Court Order (must be signed and sealed)
• 	Concealed Handgun License
• 	Certified School Transcript
• 	Pilot License
• 	Court Records
• 	Military Photo ID/Military Dependent Photo ID
• 	Armed Forces Discharge Papers (DD214, DD2, DD256, DD257, NGB Form 22, Veteran ID)
• 	Pension or Retirement Statement
Signature Affidavit: You may obtain a copy of the affidavit by visiting the ASP website.
https://www.dps.arkansas.gov/law-enforcement/arkansas-state-police/services-programs/driver-examination/
Additional documentation may be required if the documentation submitted appears questionable or if
the issuing agency has reason to believe the applicant has claimed a false identity. Additional documents
such as marriage license, adoption decree, divorce decree, etc. should be presented when the name on
the primary and secondary DO NOT match.

-- 18 of 98 --

7
Arkansas State Police Driver’s Testing
1-2-3 Checklist – UNDER AGE 18
Effective: January 8, 2026
Before a written driver’s license can begin, applicants under
the age of eighteen (18) must have these three (3) items:
1. 	Original or Certified Copy of a U.S. BIRTH CERTIFICATE
 	ALL minors, who are U.S. citizens, must present their original U.S. birth certificate.
 	No hospital birth certificates or birth registration cards will be accepted.
(No laminated or photocopied or scanned documents are accepted.)
 	Born in Arkansas and need a copy of your birth certificate? Call (501) 661-2336.
 	U.S. citizens (minors) cannot use a U.S. passport as a primary document.
 	U.S. citizens born out of the country must present a “Birth Abroad Certificate.”
 Persons with lost certificates may contact their birth country’s embassy.
 	Non-U.S. citizens must present a passport with U.S. visa and current I-94, Permanent Resident
Card, Employment Authorization Card, Naturalization Certificate or Certificate of Citizenship.
 No photocopies or translated birth certificates will be accepted as primary.
 	Out of Country Adoptions – Must present entry document (U.S. passport or current
Permanent Resident Card, Certificate of Naturalization, or Certificate of Citizenship)
 For more information and guidance: Contact Customs & Border Protection at (501) 618-8034.
 No photocopies or translated documents will be accepted.
2. 	Signature of Parent or Legal Guardian §27-16-702
• 	Parent may be present with a state driver’s license or state ID. –OR–
• 	Parent may sign an ASP-33 – Note: If you have a Permanent Resident Card, Employment
Authorization Card (with Social Security card), or a foreign passport: Please bring a copy of the
application where you applied for the document or any other USCIS document – indicating the
parent(s) name to sign for the under-aged applicant or a translated foreign birth certificate
from your home country.
• 	Legal guardians must be present with state driver’s license or state ID and court documents
establishing guardianship.
• 	A stepparent cannot sign without proof of adoption. If the child was adopted by a stepparent,
please include the following ID: adoption court documents and a state driver’s license or state ID.
 A Financial Responsibility Form may be substituted.
* See the Financial Responsibility Form (ASP-33) located on the Arkansas State Police website.
• 	Foster parents will present a Foster Resource Home Agreement Addendum or an approved
letter from their caseworker.
3. 	Accepted Secondary Identification
Applicants will need one (1) of the following:
• 	ASP-33 Parent Affidavit (In-Office) form can be signed in the presence of the examiner with
the biological parent or legal guardian.
• 	ASP-33 Parent Affidavit (Notarized) form must be completed with a notary and submitted to
the examiner within 30 days.
Important Information: If you wear contacts or glasses, please bring them with you to test!
For more detailed information visit our website:
https://www.dps.arkansas.gov/law-enforcement/arkansas-state-police/services-programs/driver-
examination/

-- 19 of 98 --

8
Visit: https://dps.arkansas.gov/wp-content/uploads/ASP-33-DL-Financial-Responsibility-Acceptance-
Form.pdf to print a copy of the ASP-33 Form (Financial Responsibility Acceptance Form), if you cannot
appear with your child.

-- 20 of 98 --

9
CHAPTER 1: ARKANSAS LAW
Arkansas Seat Belt Law
Child Passenger Protection Act 27-34-104
Protection from Secondhand Smoke for Children Act
• 	A child who is less than six (6) years of age and who weighs less than sixty
(60) pounds shall be restrained in a child passenger safety seat properly
secured to the vehicle.
• 	All children under the age of fifteen (15) must wear appropriate safety
restraints while the vehicle is in motion.
• 	Several organizations will loan you a child safety seat if you are unable to
afford one.
§20-27-1903 – Tobacco Use
A person shall not knowingly smoke tobacco in any motor vehicle in which a child who is less than
fourteen (14) years of age is a passenger.
Beginning June 30, 2009, Arkansas’ seat belt law changed to permit a law enforcement
traffic stop based on the primary violation of a motor vehicle driver or the front-seat
passenger who is buckled up. Arkansas law makes it illegal to drive or to be a front-seat
passenger, without wearing a safety belt.
Any person who violates this law shall be subject to a fine not to exceed twenty-five
dollars ($25.00), and any court costs or fees.

-- 21 of 98 --

10
ARKANSAS LAW ON LITTERING
Arkansas is “The Natural State” and litter is unnatural. More than just an ugly, offensive nuisance that
detracts from Arkansas’ scenic beauty; roadside litter is dangerous to motorists and negatively impacts the
environmental quality. Litter is also expensive to control. Motorists must accept personal responsibility
for keeping their waste items from littering Arkansas roadways. Please demonstrate pride while using
your driving privilege. Don’t permit thoughtless or careless actions to litter our state’s roadways.
Littering is also a violation of the law. Upon conviction, first offenders are subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 and not more than eight hours of community service. Subsequent convictions can result in fines up
to $2,000 and twenty-four hours of community service.
UNATTENDED CHILDREN AND PETS
Never leave children and pets unattended in a vehicle. Though we may think prior air-conditioning will
help to keep the car cool after exiting, you should know that within five minutes on a 90-degree day, the
temperature within a vehicle reaches that of the outdoors, and for every nine (9) minutes the interior
temperature increases fifteen (15) degrees. Heat enters the vehicle through windows, causing objects
within the car to heat up and trap the heat inside.
Vehicle Temperature
Outside Temp (F) 	Inside Temp (F)
10 minutes 	30 minutes
70° 	89° 	104°
75° 	94° 	109°
80° 	99° 	114°
85° 	104° 	119°
90° 	109° 	124°
95° 	114° 	129°

-- 22 of 98 --

11
MOVE OVER LAW
Arkansas law requires motorists to “move over” for police cars, fire trucks, ambulances, and other
emergency vehicles using a siren or air horn, and a red or blue flashing light. Drivers should pull over to
the right edge of the road, or near to the right as possible. Don’t hesitate to pull over when you hear sirens
or see flashing lights in any direction. If you are in an intersection, go ahead and drive through the
intersection before pulling over.
Arkansas law requires any motor vehicle on a multilane highway to move over, whenever possible, to the
farthest lane away from any stopped law enforcement vehicle with its lights turned on. This law protects
police officers and individuals involved in the traffic stop from being injured or killed by traffic moving
too close to the edge of the highway.
If a driver is found guilty of violating this law, they can be fined up to $1,000, receive jail time or both.
The court may order community service or suspend a person’s driver’s license up to six (6) months.
When an emergency vehicle is
approaching with flashing lights and
sirens you should pull over to the
right edge of the road or as near to
the right as possible.

-- 23 of 98 --

12
SCHOOL BUS LAW AND RULES
When approaching a stopped school bus with its red lights
flashing, a driver is required to make a complete stop until the
lights are turned off. No matter where your vehicle is positioned
with the bus whether it’s in the same lane of traffic, the opposing
lane, or at an intersection, YOU MUST MAKE A COMPLETE
STOP!
The driver must never attempt to pass in any direction until the
school bus has finished receiving or discharging its passengers and
begins moving without its red lights flashing.
Drivers are not required to stop if the school bus is approaching
along an opposite lane of travel separated by a median twenty (20)
feet or more in width.
School buses are required to
stop at all railroad crossings.

-- 24 of 98 --

13
Drivers passing a stopped school bus with red lights
flashing will be charged with a Misdemeanor and upon
conviction, fined a minimum of $250, not to exceed
$1,000, up to ninety (90) days in jail, and/or both.
Drivers who fail to obey this law and cause the death of
a person will be charged with a felony.
Test Question:
The school bus danger zones:
Isaac’s Law (§5-10-105):
A person who violates this law is subject to Class C Felony, for negligent homicide if he or she
negligently causes the death of another person.
Median must be 20 feet or more.
If the median is less than 20 feet,
all lanes of traffic must stop.
20 ft

-- 25 of 98 --

14
AR GOVERNOR’S COMMISSION ON PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
APRIL 2007
Handicap parking is often referred to as “Accessible Parking”. The marked handicapped parking spaces
should be used by persons with a mobility disability or other disability as defined under state law not by
persons without a handicap. Accessible Parking spaces were created to help individuals with disabilities
accomplish the same task(s) as other individuals without disabilities.
The handicapped plate is granted to the registered owner of a vehicle. A Special Certificate is registered to
the individual with the disability and can be transferred to other vehicles as long as the disabled owner of the
special certificate is present in the vehicle. When a disabled person obtains a special certificate or special
license plate, a photo identification card must be purchased for $5.00. This card should match the special
certificate number on the back of the driver’s license or State I.D. card belonging to the disabled driver.
Individuals with Special Certificates must:
• 	Be present in the vehicle when parking in an accessible parking space.
• 	The special certificate is to be displayed hanging from the rearview mirror or the dashboard.
• 	The registered owner of the special certificate or vehicle with an appropriate license plate must exit
the vehicle when utilizing a designated space.
• 	The issued or endorsed photo identification card must be present on the person at all times when
using an accessible parking space.
Anyone who illegally uses another person’s special certificate has committed fraud and could be found
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor according to Arkansas Code§27-15-305. The penalty for first (1st) offense
is a minimum of $100.00 not to exceed $500. The second offense is a minimum of $250.00 not to exceed
$1000.00, plus a six (6) month driver’s license suspension, owner is liable for towing, impoundment,
attorney fees, court costs, and any other related fees. Special Certificates must be returned to the Department
of Motor Vehicles, Special Division within thirty (30) days of moving or in case of death.
In order to park in an accessible parking space,
you must have either the appropriate license
plate with the international symbol or the
designated hang tag often referred to as a
“Special Certificate.”

-- 26 of 98 --

15
Approaching a Law Enforcement Vehicle with Emergency Lights Turned On
Approaching a Law Enforcement Vehicle with Emergency Lights Turned On- Arkansas law requires
any motor vehicle on a multilane highway to move over, whenever possible, to the farthest lane away
from any stopped law enforcement vehicle (i.e., enforcement vehicle, Arkansas DOT, utility vehicle, or a
towing vehicle) with its lights turned on. This law protects police officers and individuals involved in the
traffic stop from being injured or killed by traffic moving too close to the edge of the highway.
If a driver is found guilty of this law, they can be fined up to $500, receive jail time or both. The court
may order community service or suspend a person’s driver’s license up to six (6) months.

-- 27 of 98 --

16
CHAPTER 2: ARKANSAS RULES AND REGULATIONS
There are traffic laws, rules, and regulations that dictate where, when, and how fast you can drive, and
each is designed to help keep traffic moving safely. Rules of the road include traffic controls, lane
controls, right-of-way laws, and parking rules. The Arkansas driver’s manual provides valuable
information on safety, rules of the road, and Arkansas traffic laws.
CONSTRUCTION/MAINTENANCE/WORK ZONE SAFETY
Highway construction and maintenance work can create temporary
hazards for drivers traveling through work zones. These hazards don’t
just affect drivers – construction and maintenance workers are also at
high risk from vehicles moving through the area. From 2018 to 2021,
Work Zone crashes rose by more than 70% in Arkansas, and in 2024
there were more than 1,600 crashes in Work Zones across the state,
resulting in more than 53 serious injuries or fatalities. These injuries and
fatalities impact the lives of real people – mothers, daughters, fathers
and sons – and many of those injured are not the workers, but the people
driving the car.
Testimonial:
Jonathan Williams was struck and killed in 2025 while working on Interstate
30 at night while part of a construction crew installing reflective markers.
His story serves as a harsh reminder for drivers to limit distractions, follow
the speed limit, and move over if there’s someone working on or near the
roadway.
“He was very selfless. He would do anything for anybody, and just his job
alone speaks. He works overnight. He doesn’t work during the day. He
works overnight to make sure that people can drive to work during the day
without having to deal with construction workers and, you know,
postponing their day to get to and from work. They took someone’s father.
They took someone’s son. Nobody’s really doing that well. Your head
should be on a swivel, because not only do you have your own life in your
hands when you’re driving, you have to pay attention to everyone else.”
–Patricia Abernathy, mother of Williams’ two oldest sons

-- 28 of 98 --

17
Two driver behaviors that can be especially problematic in Work Zones are speeding and distracted
driving. While not specific to Work Zones, the statistics below show the impacts of those behaviors:
• 	From 2016 to 2020, 23% of traffic fatalities and 19% of serious injuries in Arkansas involved
speeding and aggressive driving.
• 	The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) reports that 3,275 people were
killed nationally in crashes caused by distracted driving in 2023. National research has found that
distracted teens who are texting while driving are 23 times more likely to be involved in a crash. A
compounding factor of these crashes are that they are often more serious due to the delayed or lack
of driver reaction to hazards.
Through many work zones, the speed limits may be reduced,
and lane usage could be restricted for safety purposes. Any
reduced speed will be clearly posted within the work zone. If
there are no reduced speed limits posted, drivers should obey
the normally posted speed limit. Remember to be prepared
for the unexpected when traveling through work zones.
Highway work zones are established according to the type of
work underway along the roadway. “Standard” Work Zones
for highway construction differ from “Mobile” Work Zones.
A standard Work Zone generally identifies a construction site
that may exist in one location for months or years, while a
Mobile Work Zone exists where work is being performed for
a short period of time. in one location. Many times, mobile
work zones will travel at slow speeds with periodic stops to
perform the necessary work. For instance, a highway
maintenance crew may be painting stripes on the roadway,
removing debris, or patching potholes. That would be
considered a Mobile Work Zone.
Testimonial:
“In the past, we were most worried about drivers we could see coming
whose cars were maybe moving a little fast or were swerving a little bit.
Now, one of our biggest fears is looking out and seeing a driver’s head
down looking at their phone, or at night the reflection of their phone’s light
on their face.”
–Hunter Lake, ARDOT District 6 Engineer

-- 29 of 98 --

18
Green Lights in Work Zones- The Arkansas Legislature recently authorized the use of flashing green
lights on roadway construction and maintenance vehicles. These lights, which can be used in addition to
yellow or white lights, improve visibility in various weather conditions and enhance worker safety. The
presence of these lights indicates an active Work Zone (either Standard or Mobile), and drivers should
exercise caution and slow down when they are seen.
Work Zone Signs- Signs in Work Zones serve as a warning that people are working on or near the
highway. They may be diamond or rectangular shaped, and the background may be orange, white or black
with white or black letters or symbols. Work Zone signs include reducing speed, detours, slow-moving
construction equipment, and poor or suddenly changing road surfaces. In work areas, traffic may be
controlled by a person with a sign or flag, known as a flagger. Traffic control devices, roadway markings,
flaggers and even police officers are used to direct motorists safely through Work Zones to protect
travelers and highway workers.
Examples of Work Zone Signs:

-- 30 of 98 --

19
THESE RULES APPLY WHEN WORKERS ARE PRESENT IN A WORK ZONE
Fines Double- If a driver receives a citation for any moving traffic violation in a Work Zone, they will
pay double the fine. A moving traffic violation includes speeding, reckless driving, distracted driving,
and more. Depending on the traffic violation, doubled fines can be as high as $5,000. Mobile Work
Zones are treated the same as any other standard or stationary Work Zone, meaning fines double for
violations in both types of Work Zones. Mobile Work Zones are marked using signage on the back of
ARDOT vehicles.
Leave Your Phone Alone- Does holding your phone to take a phone call, send
a text message, look up directions, or scroll social media count as a moving
traffic violation? Yes. If you can’t use a hands-free connection while driving,
then don’t use your phone.
Know the Work Zone Speed Limit- When
approaching a Work Zone, you will see signs
indicating you are entering a Work Zone, and there
may be signs that show a reduced speed. When you
see these signs, you should begin to slow down.
Continue at a reduced speed until you see a posted
speed limit sign.
Additionally, speed enforcement cameras are used
in Interstate Work Zones in Arkansas. The speed
enforcement cameras allow an officer to be
positioned at the end of a Work Zone, use the
camera to observe violations within the Work Zone,
and safely pull over the violator as they exit the
Work Zone. The camera eliminates the need for an
officer to be positioned within a Work Zone,
enhancing safety.

-- 31 of 98 --

20
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION: How do I know what to do when
coming up to a Work Zone?
ANSWER: To safely navigate a Work Zone, reduce
speed to the posted limits, eliminate distractions like cell
phones, and stay alert to and obey signs and road crew
instructions. Maintain a safe following distance to
prevent rear-end collisions, and be prepared for
unexpected changes in traffic flow. Always obey flaggers, watch for workers and equipment, and
continue to pay attention to signs until you have exited the Work Zone.
Before Entering the Work Zone:
1. 	Plan Ahead- Check for Work Zones on your route before you leave and consider taking an
alternate route if available.
2. 	Minimize Distractions- Put your phone away, turn down the radio, and focus entirely on driving
to be prepared for the unexpected.
Entering the Work Zone:
1. 	Reduce Speed- Travel at the posted speed limit. Many times the speed limit is reduced through
work zones due to temporary hazards.
2. 	Merge Early- If you see lane closures ahead, change to the correct lane as soon as it's safe to do
so, ideally a mile or more before the closure.
3. 	Be Patient- Be prepared for delays and the possibility of sudden stops.
While in the Work Zone:
1. 	Stay Alert- Watch for workers, equipment, construction barrels, cones, and changes in traffic
patterns.
2. 	Maintain Distance- Keep a safe following distance, because rear-end collisions are common in
Work Zones.
3. 	Obey Instructions- Obey all warning signs and traffic control such as flaggers, barrels, and cones.
Mobile Work Zone:
1. 	There may be signs showing there is work ahead, and there will be work vehicles with flashing
green, yellow, or white lights.
2. 	Work vehicles in a Mobile Work Zone will have signs on the back indicating “Work Zone –
Fines Double.”

-- 32 of 98 --

21
QUESTION: What is a “Move Over” law?
ANSWER: The key aspects of Move Over laws are:
• 	Purpose: To allow additional space for emergency responders, construction workers, utility
workers, and tow truck operators to perform their duties safely and without fear of being struck
by passing vehicles.
• 	Action:
o 	Move Over- If able, change to a lane not immediately adjacent to the stationary vehicle.
o 	Slow Down- If moving over is unsafe or impossible, reduce your speed to a safe level for
conditions or a legally mandated speed.
• 	Vehicles Covered: While most laws cover police, fire, and ambulance vehicles, Arkansas has
expanded the law to include other vehicles with flashing lights such as:
o 	Arkansas Department of Transportation (ARDOT) vehicles
o 	Utility vehicles
o 	Construction vehicles
o 	Tow trucks
• 	Consequences: Violating a Move Over law can result in fines, imprisonment, community
service, and suspension of a driver's license.
Why the Move Over Law Is Important:
• 	Reduces Fatalities: Move Over laws help prevent injuries and fatalities among roadside workers.
• 	Increases Safety: They help prevent accidents by giving drivers more time to see and react to
stopped vehicles and the people working around them.

-- 33 of 98 --

22
QUESTION: What do I do when there is a flagger?
ANSWER: When entering a Work Zone with a flagger, follow these actions:
• 	Slow Down and Stay Alert:
Immediately reduce your
speed when you see Work
Zone signs and remain
attentive to your surroundings.
• 	Follow Flagger Instructions:
Always obey the flagger's
signals or signs, such as a
STOP/SLOW paddle. Their
instructions overrule any other
traffic signals or devices.
• 	Stop Promptly: Stop at the
designated location, or at least
a car length away from the
flagger, and wait for directions to proceed.
• 	Maintain Distance: Keep a safe distance between your vehicle and the flagger, workers,
and equipment.
• 	Avoid Distractions: Put your phone away and focus solely on driving and the Work
Zone environment.
Why Flaggers Are Important:
• 	Safety: Flaggers are frontline workers whose primary role is to ensure the safety of both the work
crews and the motoring public.
• 	Authority: They are legally authorized to direct traffic in Work Zones and manage traffic flow
through temporary conditions.
• 	Communication: They use signals, stop/slow paddles, high visibility flags, and sometimes signs
to communicate directions to drivers, guiding them through the temporary changes in the road. .
What to Expect:
• 	Unexpected Conditions: Be prepared for lane shifts, reduced speed limits, uneven road surfaces,
and the presence of heavy machinery.
• 	One-Way Traffic: You will experience traffic being held in one direction while the other
direction is allowed to pass slowly, often guided by a flagger or pilot car.

-- 34 of 98 --

23
A green light allows you to proceed through an intersection if there is no
opposing traffic. If a driver is stopped at a controlled intersection on a green
light, the driver must allow opposing traffic already in the intersection to
clear before proceeding.
A red light means the driver must stop. The driver cannot proceed until the
light turns green and it is safe to go.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS, SIGNS, AND PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Traffic controls include traffic signals, traffic signs, and pavement markings. Other traffic controls could
be law enforcement, highway personnel, or school crossing guards. Any traffic control must be obeyed
when driving.
Lighted Traffic Signals
A yellow light means caution. A steady yellow light means the traffic signal
is changing from green to red. You must stop if it is safe to do so. If you are
already stopped at an intersection or a stop line, you may not proceed.
A traffic light is a road signal for directing vehicular traffic. The lights inform the
driver when to stop, where to stop and when to proceed. Traffic lights have three
different color lenses (red, yellow, and green), a driver may approach an
intersection with any one of these colors.

-- 35 of 98 --

24
A steady red arrow means stop. Drivers turning left must
stop. A red arrow on a traffic light means you may not turn
in the direction of the arrow.
A steady yellow arrow means the signal is getting ready to
turn red. Drivers turning left should stop if it is safe to do so.
A flashing yellow arrow means left turns are permitted.
Drivers may turn left but must yield to oncoming traffic
and pedestrians, then proceed with caution.
A light green arrow on a traffic light means you may turn
in the direction of the arrow. Left turns are protected.
Drivers may turn in the direction of the arrow. Opposing
traffic must stop.
If you are in a turn lane and there is a traffic arrow for your
lane on the traffic light, you should make your turn after
the green arrow has appeared and it is safe to do so.
Flashing Lights
Lighted Arrows
There are four (4) types of lighted arrows used to control traffic.
A flashing red light is the same as a stop sign. A driver must come to a
complete stop, and then proceed only when it is safe.
If you are approaching a flashing yellow light, you should slow down and proceed
with caution.

-- 36 of 98 --

25
A stop sign is red with white letters and has eight
(8) sides or octagon shaped.
RIGHT ON RED RULE
Drivers must follow the rules before turning right on red. When approaching an intersection with a red
light and the driver intends to turn right, a complete stop and a check for opposing traffic must be made
before turning right. Drivers must always look for pedestrians in or about the crosswalks. You should
never block or stop your vehicle within a crosswalk.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS
Stop Signs
Traffic signs display traffic rules, hazards, location, travel directions, and where services are located. The
shape and color of these signs will determine the type of information that will be placed on the sign.
A stop sign means a driver must come to a complete stop. The driver must wait until crossing vehicles
and pedestrians have cleared the intersection. Streets or roadways may have a painted line next to a stop
sign, at intersections, indicating where the vehicle must stop. If you are approaching a stop sign and
obstacles are blocking your view, you should make a complete stop and pull forward to see. You may
proceed when safe to do so.
Speed Limit Sign
The driver may turn right on red unless there is a
sign prohibiting a right turn on red.
A speed limit sign indicates the minimum and maximum speed allowed for a
particular section of highway or street. The maximum speed should be used in ideal
conditions and reduced as conditions arise such as slippery roads or poor visibility.

-- 37 of 98 --

26
A reflective orange triangle bordered with red
warns other road users that the vehicle is traveling
slower than the normal speed of traffic.
27-51-216. Speed Limits and Traffic-Control Devices on County Roads – Penalty
(a) As used in this section, “county road” means a public road that is not a state highway, interstate
highway, or city street within the jurisdiction of a given county.
(b) (1) Each county judge may establish speed limits on county roads within the jurisdictional boundaries
of his or her county.
(2) If a county judge has not established a speed limit on a county road within the jurisdictional
boundaries of his or her county, then the speed limit shall be forty miles per hour (40 m.p.h.) on the
county road.
(c) (1) A person who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is found guilty of a violation of a speed limit
on a county road established by a county judge or as provided under this section shall be assessed a
penalty as provided under 27-50-3
(2) A person who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is found guilty of speeding in excess of fifteen
miles per hour (15 m.p.h.) over the posted speed limit on a county road established by a county judge or
as provided under this section is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(d) A traffic-control device that is erected on a county road shall conform to the uniform manual on
traffic-control devices adopted by the State Highway Commission.
Do Not Enter Signs
Yield Sign
The yield sign means the driver must slow down or yield the right of way to traffic in the intersection,
where the driver may be crossing or entering. When approaching a yield sign you must yield to other
vehicles and stop when necessary. A driver who fails to yield could receive a fine of up to $1000 and
suspension of their driver’s license for 180 days.
Slow Moving Vehicle Sign
A yield sign is a red and white or yellow and black that
is triangular shaped displaying the word “YIELD” or
“YIELD RIGHT OF WAY.”
The do not enter sign is typically a red circle with a line
running across or diagonal line through it, meaning
something is not allowed.

-- 38 of 98 --

27
ROADWAY SIGNS
Warning Signs- These signs are yellow with black lettering or symbols, and most are diamond-
shaped. These signs warn a driver to slow down and be prepared to stop, if necessary, or provide
information about a special situation or a hazard that may be along the road ahead. The most
common warning signs are shown below.
Intersection 	Traffic Signal 	Merging Traffic 	Slippery When Wet
Traffic Lane Ends 	School Zone 	School Crossing 	Pedestrian Crossing
Regulation Signs
There are signs on a white square or rectangle with black and/or red letters or symbols. These signs provide
information on rules of traffic direction, lane usage, turning, parking, and other special instructions. Some
of the signs have a red circle with a red slash 	over the symbol. This regulation sign indicates a driver
is prohibited (not allowed) from executing a particular maneuver such as a turn toward a particular direction
or no U-Turn.

-- 39 of 98 --

28
This is a white “X” shaped sign with black letters. This sign marks the
grade crossing and requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train.
The round black-on-yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public
highway-rail intersection. The Advance Warning sign tells you to
slow down, look and listen for the train, and be prepared to stop at the
tracks if a train is coming.
RAILROAD CROSSING SIGNS
Railroad crossing warning signs are used to warn drivers of the possibility of a train. Drivers
should obey all railroad crossing warning signs and never go around barriers or disregard the
warning sign. Drivers should never attempt to beat an oncoming train or attempt to cross the
tracks without enough room on the opposite side of the tracks. If your vehicle is equipped with a
manual transmission, it is wise not to shift gears when crossing the tracks to avoid the possibility
of an engine stall. Common railroad crossing warning signs are illustrated below.
Round Yellow Advance Warning Sign
Pavement Markings
Pavement markings mean the same as the Advance Warning sign. They
consist of an “X” with the letters “RR” and a no-passing marking on two-
lane roads.
There is also a NO PASSING ZONE sign on two-lane roads. There may
be a white Stop Line painted on the pavement before the railroad tracks.
School buses are required to stop at all railroad crossings.
Cross Buck Sign

-- 40 of 98 --

29
NEVER attempt to go around crossing gates.
At some crossings, along with a crossbuck sign, a driver will see parallel red
lights that flash alternately.
When the red lights are flashing, a train is present. Even if the red lights continue
to flash and no train appears, do not cross.
As red lights begin to flash the gates will lower which means a train is
approaching.
When the gates are down, it means a train is present and the road is closed. It is
unsafe and illegal to cross. If the gates begin to come down as you begin to cross,
keep going even if it means you will break the gate.
If you are approaching a railroad crossing and there is no safety barrier you should
cross the tracks after checking both directions.
The purpose of the ENS sign is to provide the public with critical
emergency contact information at every highway-rail grade crossing. The
information contained on the ENS sign enables the public to reach the
railroad responsible for the crossing and to identify the specific crossing in
the event of an emergency.
Gates and Lights
EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION SYSTEMS (ENS) AT HIGHWAY-RAIL GRADE
CROSSINGS
Railroad (Exempt) Signs
An EXEMPT sign means that the crossing has been abandoned or its use discontinued. Follow
your local procedure about stopping.
There are two (2) kinds of EXEMPT signs:
A sign (below the advanced warning sign) with yellow
background and black letters that says EXEMPT.
A sign (below the cross buck) with white background and
black letters that says EXEMPT.

-- 41 of 98 --

30
Safety Tips:
• 	Never Park or stop on railroad tracks.
• 	When approaching a railroad crossing, look up and down the track to make sure a train
is not approaching.
• 	Always expect a train. Never assume a train is not coming even if you haven’t seen one
at a particular crossing.
• 	Never underestimate the speed and distance of a train.
• 	Obey all crossing signals.
NEVER TRY AND BEAT A TRAIN!
Multiple Tracks
There are warning signs that indicate sets of tracks or indicates
the number of tracks. These signs warn a driver there is more
than one track and there may be more than one train crossing.
When there is more than one set of tracks at a crossing, there is a
sign beneath the cross buck with a number indicating how many
tracks are present. Watch for additional trains coming from
either direction.
When crossing more than one set of railroad
tracks you should cross only when the train is
well down the tracks.

-- 42 of 98 --

31
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL DRIVING
LANES OF TRAFFIC
Pavement Markings- Lines and symbols marked on the roadway divide lanes, indicate to a driver
when it is safe to pass other vehicles or change lane(s), which lane(s) to use for turns, where a
driver must stop for signs or traffic signals, and define pedestrian walkways.
Yellow Lane Markings
Fog Line and Lane Lines- A solid white line along the side of the
roadway that tells the driver where the outer edge is located.
White Lane Markings- A dashed white line between lanes of traffic
indicates a driver may cross the line to change lanes, when safe.
These lines separate lanes of traffic moving in the same direction.
A broken yellow line between opposing
lanes of traffic indicates a driver may
cross to pass if there is no opposing
traffic.
A solid line with a broken yellow line
between opposing lanes, a driver may
pass if there is no opposing traffic.
A solid double yellow line separates lanes of traffic
moving in opposite directions. The double yellow line in
the center of the roadway means passing is prohibited for
vehicles traveling in either direction. A driver may cross a
solid yellow line to turn into a driveway if there is no
opposing traffic approaching the planned turn site.

-- 43 of 98 --

32
Shared Center Lane- In Arkansas, it is permissible for a vehicle making a left turn from an
intersecting street or driveway to utilize a center turn lane as part of the maneuver to gain access
or merge into traffic lanes, except it is not permissible to use the center left turn lane as an
acceleration lane.
Example:
Unmarked Lanes- When there are no signs or markings to control the use of lanes, there are rules
that indicate which lane is to be used. These rules cover general driving, passing, and turning.
General Driving:
• 	Never back a vehicle in any travel lane, it is illegal and unsafe. If you miss your turn or
exit, do not back up; proceed to a safe turnaround area.
• 	Never stop in travel lanes for any reason (e.g., confusion, breakdown, passenger drop off,
etc.). Keep moving until you can safely pull off the road.
• 	On a road with three or more lanes traveling in the same direction remain in the right lane
except to pass. If there is a lot of merging traffic, then use the center travel lane.
• 	Never drive on the shoulder of any street or road, unless directed by a police officer.
Passing- On multi-lane roads, the leftmost lane is intended to be used to pass slower vehicles.
Never pass on the shoulder, whether it is paved or not. Other drivers will never expect you to be
there and may pull off the road without looking.
Vehicle merges from the right
lane into the left lane, to pass
slower traffic.
Shared center lanes are reserved for making left turns and
can be used by vehicles traveling in either direction. The
example will show markings on the pavement, left turn
arrows for traffic in one direction and alternate arrows for
traffic approaching from the opposing direction.

-- 44 of 98 --

33
Turning- When there are no signs or lane markings to control turning, a driver should turn into
the lane closest to the direction of travel.
• 	Right Turns- When turning avoid crossing over into the opposite lane of traffic. A wide turn
may cause the driver behind you to think you are changing lanes or going to turn left and may
try to pass you on the right.
• 	Left Turns- When turning left, avoid cutting the corners. Turning sharp could cause you to
hit a vehicle approaching from the left. Always leave room for oncoming vehicles to turn left
in front of you.

-- 45 of 98 --

34
Multiple Lanes- On multi-lane highways, when driving beside another vehicle, you should move
ahead of the vehicle next to you or drop behind the vehicle next to you. If you are being followed
to close on a multi-lane roadway, you should move into the lane to your right when clear. When
passing vehicles on multi-lane roads, the far-left lane is intended for passing slower vehicles.
Crosswalks and Stop Lines
Stop Line- When approaching a stop sign you must stop
your vehicle at the stop line if one is present. Make a
complete stop before the vehicle reaches the line.
Crosswalks- Marked areas where pedestrians can cross the roadway.
A driver must yield to pedestrians in or about to enter a crosswalk.
Not all crosswalks are marked. Drivers should watch for pedestrians
when crossing intersections that do not have marked crosswalks.
Pedestrians carrying a white cane or using a guide dog must be given
absolute right of way.

-- 46 of 98 --

35
RIGHT OF WAY
When there are no signs or signals to regulate traffic and pedestrians may be present, there are
rules in which a vehicle must yield the right-of-way. The rules will determine which vehicle goes
first and which vehicle must wait.
Traffic laws determine which vehicle must yield the right-of-way and do not give a vehicle
absolute right-of-way. As a driver, you must do everything possible to prevent striking a
pedestrian or another vehicle, regardless of the circumstance.
Intersections- Right of Way
Pedestrians:
• 	Drivers must yield, where necessary, to avoid striking pedestrians who are legally crossing the road.
• 	Drivers crossing a sidewalk when entering or exiting a driveway, alley, or parking lot must yield
to pedestrians. It is illegal to drive on a sidewalk except to cross it.
• 	Pedestrians using a guide dog or carrying a white cane have absolute right-of-way. Do not use
your horn as it could confuse or frighten a blind pedestrian.
Left Turns:
• 	Drivers turning left must yield to oncoming cars traveling straight ahead.
• 	Drivers entering a traffic circle or rotary must yield to drivers already in the circle.

-- 47 of 98 --

36
ROUNDABOUTS
A roundabout is a circular intersection in which traffic travels around a central island. This simple
design is becoming increasingly popular for its safety, mobility, and maintenance advantages. The
next two pages give a more in-depth look at roundabouts.

-- 48 of 98 --

37

-- 49 of 98 --

38

-- 50 of 98 --

39
Right of Way at Stop Signs
At an intersection where there is no stop sign or traffic signal, drivers must yield to vehicles
approaching from the right.
At intersections with stop signs at all corners, you must yield the right-of-way to the vehicle that
arrived first.

-- 51 of 98 --

40
At “3 WAY,” “4 WAY,” and “ALL WAY” stop signs, the driver reaching
the intersection first goes first, after making a complete stop.
General Right of Way Rules
• 	Drivers crossing a sidewalk when entering or exiting a driveway, alley, or parking lot must yield to
pedestrians. It is illegal to drive on a sidewalk except to cross it.
• 	Drivers entering a road from a driveway, alley or roadside must yield to vehicles already on the
main road.
• 	Drivers may not enter an intersection unless they can get through it without having to stop. You
should wait until traffic clears so that you are not blocking the intersection.
• 	Before entering an intersection, you should look left and right.
Passing
Drivers passing a vehicle traveling in the same direction must yield to the vehicle being passed, even if
the vehicle is slowing or coming to a stop because the vehicle may be attempting to turn left or may be
approaching a hazard the overtaking vehicle does not see.
Example: Red vehicle must yield to blue vehicle being passed. Be aware of the
vehicle you are passing and watch for any possible sudden turns or stops.

-- 52 of 98 --

41
PARKING
When parking a vehicle, drivers need to make sure their vehicle doesn’t become a hazard. You should
always park your vehicle in a place that is (1) far enough from the street or highway to avoid interfering
with traffic and (2) visible to cars approaching from either direction. When backing from a parking space
or in a straight line you must always look for vehicles and pedestrians by looking through your mirrors and
turning to look.
Parking Tips:
• 	Always Park in a designated area, if possible.
• 	Always set the parking brake. Leave the vehicle in gear if it has a manual transmission or in “park”
if it has an automatic transmission.
• 	Check traffic before you open the door. Always exit the vehicle on the curbside, if possible. If you
have no choice other than exiting on the street side, check traffic before getting out of your vehicle.
• 	When parallel parking, your vehicle should be 18 inches or less from the curb.
• 	If you park on the roadway, park your vehicle as far away from traffic as possible. If there is a curb,
park as close to the curb as possible.
• 	When parking on a hill, turn the wheels sharply away from traffic to prevent the car from rolling
into traffic.
• 	No driver, when standing on a distinct grade, will leave a vehicle unattended “without first
effectively setting the parking brake and turning the wheels to the curb or side of the highway”.
Curb Parking 	No Curb Parking
No Parking Zones- There are areas where parking is restricted. Check for signs that may prohibit
or limit parking. Colored curb markings may indicate a restricted parking area.

-- 53 of 98 --

42
DO NOT PARK:
• 	In an intersection
• 	On a crosswalk or sidewalk in a construction area if your vehicle blocks traffic
• 	Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection
• 	Within thirty (30) feet of a traffic signal, stop sign, or yield sign.
• 	Within thirty (30) feet of a pedestrian safety zone
• 	Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant
• 	Within fifty (50) feet of a railroad crossing
• 	More than eighteen (18) inches from the curb
• 	Within twenty (20) feet of a fire station driveway on the same side of the street, or street where
proper signs are posted.
• 	Blocking a driveway, alley, private road, or area of the curb removed or lowered for access to the
sidewalk.
• 	On a bridge, overpass, tunnel, or underpass
• 	Along a lane of opposing traffic
• 	Designated handicapped zone without proper tag
• 	Along the street or highway next to another parked vehicle (double parking)
• 	On railroad tracks
• 	Where signs indicate no parking zones
Restricted Parking Zones
Other restricted parking zones are indicated by painted curbs:
• 	Red curb means fire zone.
• 	Yellow curb means a loading zone or other restriction.

-- 54 of 98 --

43
CHAPTER 4: SAFE DRIVING
A driver’s manual cannot teach you how to operate a motor vehicle, but it can provide you with the
necessary tools for learning the rules of the road and help you understand the importance of becoming a
safe driver. Being a safe driver depends on you being alert to your surroundings. Driving requires a skill
that can be gained through hours of instruction and practice. This section will provide you with safe
driving tips before starting a trip.
Operating the Motor Vehicle
Seat Belt- “Buckle up before you start up”. Your safety belt should be fastened before the engine is
started. Drivers should check the safety belt to ensure proper use. Follow these tips:
• 	Wear a diagonal belt across the upper chest. Drivers often complain that this strap is
uncomfortable, and they sometimes slip this behind their backs. However, when you do this, the
belt's ability to protect you from injury is decreased. Seat belts are designed to distribute force
upon two areas of the body. Without this diagonal strap in place, this is impossible. If the strap is
uncomfortable for you or your children, purchase a padded seat belt cover.
• 	Adjust the lower strap, so it fits across the upper thighs and not the abdominal region. This belt is
designed to distribute force to the pelvic area and needs to sit properly on the upper thigh to
accomplish this goal.
• 	Sit up straight in your seat. Slouching or leaning in the seat can cause the seat belt to rest
improperly on the body. By sitting all the way back in the seat, the belts will sit on the correct
areas of the body.
• 	Maneuver the position of the seat itself. The farther a driver is sitting from the dashboard,
typically the safer he is in the case of a collision. Move the handle or knob on the side of your
seat to move the seat forward, backward, upward, or downward, so it is a comfortable distance
from the steering wheel, this will allow you to see well out of all windows.
• 	Check that the seat belts are not twisted. The belts should lie flat across your upper chest and your
upper thigh areas. If the belts become twisted, the pressure that would occur in a collision has less
surface area on which to be distributed.
• 	Click the seat belt latch into place by sliding the metal end of the belt into the latching device.
You should hear a click. Test the belt by tugging on it. If the belt doesn't come unlatched, the seat
belt is secure.

-- 55 of 98 --

44
Acceleration- Acceleration (pressing the gas pedal) should be pressed slowly and smoothly. Depressing
the gas pedal too fast can cause the drive wheels to spin or cause your vehicle to slide, especially if the
pavement is wet. Drivers with manual transmissions need practice with the clutch and accelerator to avoid
stalling the engine when shifting gears or over-accelerating the engine.
Steering the Vehicle- Drivers should use a proper grip on the steering wheel. Hands should be placed on
opposite sides of the steering wheel. By placing the hands-on opposite sides of the wheel, the driver will
be more comfortable, and it will allow you to make turns without taking your hands off the wheel.
Monitor Vehicle Speed- Be familiar with speed limits and adjust your speed according to the driving
conditions. Always obey speed limit signs. Check your speedometer often to ensure you are within the
speed limit.
Speedometer
Stopping- Be alert when driving your vehicle and be prepared to stop, you may have to stop suddenly.
Stopping suddenly is dangerous and indicates a driver who is not paying attention. Braking quickly can
cause your vehicle to skid and cause you to lose control. Losing control of your vehicle can make it
difficult for others to avoid hitting your vehicle.
Try to avoid sudden stops and scan the road ahead. Slowing down or changing lanes will help to avoid
sudden stopping and allow more time to safely stop.
When executing a sharp turn, such as around corners of an intersection, use
the “hand-over-hand” technique to control the steering wheel. Do not turn
the wheel in the palm of your hand. When you complete a turn, return the
steering wheel to the appropriate position in the direction the vehicle
should be moving.

-- 56 of 98 --

45
DISTRACTED DRIVING (REQUIRED)
Overview
Distracted driving is dangerous, having claimed 3,308 lives and injuring 290,000 in 2022. Of those killed
due to distracted driving, almost 20 percent of related crashes were people outside the vehicle –
pedestrians, cyclists, and others on the road. NHTSA reports certain age groups having larger proportions
of drivers distracted at the time of fatal crashes – drivers 15 to 34 years old and drivers 75 and older. To
help keep young drivers off their phones, 36 states and the District of Columbia also ban new drivers
from using cellphones behind the wheel.
NHTSA leads the national effort to save lives by preventing this dangerous behavior. Get the facts, get
involved, and help us keep America’s roads safe. www.nhtsa.gov/risky-driving/distracted-driving.
What is Distracted Driving?
Distracted driving is any activity that diverts attention from driving, including talking or texting on your
phone, eating and drinking, talking to people in your vehicle, fiddling with the stereo, entertainment, or
navigation system — anything that takes your attention away from the task of safe driving.
Texting is the most alarming distraction. Sending or reading a text takes your eyes off the road for 5
seconds. At 55 mph, that's like driving the length of an entire football field with your eyes closed.
You cannot drive safely unless the task of driving has your full attention. Any non-driving activity you
engage in is a potential distraction and increases your risk of crashing.
*Source for the above information on distracted driving:
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)

-- 57 of 98 --

46
Dangerous Distractions
What is one of the most dangerous distractions for a driver?
Texting or talking on a hand-held cell phone involves three different types of distraction that occur at the
same time:
The U.S. Department of Transportation is leading the fight
to end distracted driving through a combination of:
• 	Tough laws
• 	Strong enforcement
• 	Increased public awareness
Distracted Driving Law
Arkansas has joined the fight by passing laws against distracted driving.
27-51-1501 – No Texting Law
27-51-1601 – Fewer Distractions Means Safer Driving Act
• 	Restricts Cell Phone Use (ONLY AN EMERGENCY)
• 	Under eighteen (18) years of age cell phone use is not allowed. The use of hands-free
devices is not allowed.
• 	18 years of age or older may use a hands-free device, even though it’s not recommended
to a cell phone while driving.
• 	21 years or older may use a cell phone but drivers should be aware it is never safe to talk
and drive.
• 	Visual
Taking your eyes off the road
• 	Manual
Taking your hands off the wheel
• 	Cognitive
Taking your mind off driving

-- 58 of 98 --

47
What Can You Do?
• 	Make a pledge to protect lives by never texting or talking on the phone while driving.
• 	Be a good passenger and speak up if the driver in your car is distracted.
• 	Spread the word to your family and friends about the dangers of distracted driving.
Get Involved
For more information on distracted driving visit, www.distraction.com to get more facts, take
the pledge, and download materials to run your own distracted driving campaign.

-- 59 of 98 --

48
STAY ALERT
Being a safe driver depends on you staying alert to your surroundings. The leading cause of car crashes is
inattention.
Practice good defensive driving skills by being alert and by keeping your eyes fixed on the road ahead.
Looking ahead- To avoid last-minute braking or the need to turn from interstate or highway, you should look down
the road at least one (1) city block, when driving in the city or one-quarter mile when driving on highways and
interstates. You should be looking at least fifteen (15) seconds ahead.
.
Here is how to figure if you are looking fifteen seconds ahead:
1. Find a stationary object (sign or telephone pole) near the
road. Choose one as far ahead as you are seeing.
2. Start counting: one-one-thousand, two-one-thousand, three-
one thousand, etc. until you reach the object.
3. The number of seconds you have counted is the number of
seconds ahead from the object, you need to avoid.
Intersections- Intersections are places where traffic merges
or crosses. Intersections include cross streets, side streets,
driveways, shopping centers, or parking lot entrances.
• 	Before entering an intersection, you should look left
and right. Look a second time in the direction of
oncoming traffic before crossing.
• 	Before turning right, check for approaching traffic from
the left and check for oncoming traffic turning left in
your path. Do not begin to turn without checking for
pedestrians, who may be crossing where you are
turning. You may turn right on a red light, after making
a complete stop, unless there is a sign prohibiting “right
on red”.
• 	Make sure you can clearly see crossing traffic before
entering an intersection. If stopped at an intersection
and your view of a cross street is blocked, ease forward
until you can see. Moving forward will allow the driver
to see any approaching traffic.

-- 60 of 98 --

49
Looking Behind- Checking traffic ahead of your route is important but you must also remember to check
the traffic behind you. In heavy traffic, occasionally, watch your rearview and side mirrors to know where
traffic is positioned. By checking your mirrors, you will be able to see rear traffic approaching too fast and
vehicles following too close, which will allow you more time to react. Before making a lane change you
should be sure it’s safe by using the rearview mirror, and side mirrors, and looking over your shoulder.
CHANGING LANES
Changing Lanes- A Lane change is moving from one lane of traffic to another, merging onto a roadway
from an entrance ramp, turn lane, or roadway entrance from the curb or shoulder. When changing lanes,
you must check for any vehicles that are in the lane you want to enter. This means you must check the
side and the back of your vehicle before changing lanes.
• 	Look in your rear-view and side mirrors. Make sure there are no vehicles in
the lane you want to enter and make sure no one is about to pass you.
• 	Look over your shoulder in the direction you plan to move. Your rearview and
side mirrors will not allow you to see vehicles in your blind spots. Blind spots
are the rear corners of your vehicle that block other vehicles not seen through
your mirrors.
• 	When checking your blind spot, turn your head and quickly glance over your
shoulder. Don’t take your eyes off the road ahead for more than an instant.
Traffic ahead could stop suddenly while you’re checking traffic to the sides,
rear, or over your shoulder.
• 	Remember to look carefully for motorcycles, bicycles and pedestrians which
can be especially hard to see when you are entering the roadway from the curb
or driveway.

-- 61 of 98 --

50
Slowing- Drivers should check behind them before slowing down. Allowing plenty of time to slow down
will keep you from stopping suddenly or at points where the following driver would not expect you to
slow, such as private driveways or parking lots.
Backing- It can be difficult to get a clear view from behind your vehicle. When backing from a
parking space or straight line you should:
.
• 	Check behind your vehicle before you get in.
Children or small objects cannot be seen from the
driver’s seat.
• 	Place your right arm over the back of the seat and
turn your body, so you can look directly through the
rear and side windows. Do not depend on your
rearview or side mirrors as you cannot see directly
behind your vehicle.
• 	Back slowly, your vehicle is much harder to steer
while you are backing.
• 	Whenever possible use a person outside the vehicle
to help you back.
Blind Spots- A blind spot in a vehicle is an area around the
vehicle that cannot be directly observed by the driver while at
the controls, under existing circumstances.
Blind Spot Tips:
• Do not drive on either side or slightly in the rear of
other vehicles.
• When passing another vehicle, do not stay in another
driver’s blind spot.
• Never stay alongside a large vehicle such as a
tractor-trailer or bus.
• Get out of the other driver’s blind spot as soon
as possible by speeding up or slowing down.

-- 62 of 98 --

51
CHAPTER 5: SEE AND BE SEEN
Accidents often happen because one driver does not see another driver, or when one driver does something,
the other driver does not expect. Some drivers do not always pay attention to what is going on around them.
It is important that drivers let other road users know they are there, and what they plan to do.
External Vehicle Lights
Headlights help you see at night and help others see you. To alert other drivers flick your headlight if
needed. Remember to turn on your headlights whenever you have trouble seeing others.
• 	Use your headlights on rainy, snowy, or foggy days so others can see you. Arkansas law requires
drivers to turn on their headlights when windshield wipers are needed.
• 	Turn on your headlights a ½ hour (30 minutes) after sunset, a ½ hour (30 minutes) before sunrise,
or anytime you cannot see a person or object clearly within 500 feet.
• 	Parking lights are for parked cars. It is illegal in Arkansas to drive using only parking lights. Test
High and Low Beam Headlights
Here are some driving tips that can help you be seen:
• 	Use your high beams whenever there are no oncoming vehicles. High beams let you see twice
as far as low beams. If you are driving on unfamiliar roads, in construction zones, or where
there may be others along the side of the road use your high-beam headlights to see
approaching objects.
• 	Dim your high beams whenever you come within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle.
• 	Use your low-beam headlights when following another vehicle closer than 200 feet.
• 	When driving in fog, snow, or heavy rain you should use your low headlight beams. The light
from high beams will reflect, causing glare, making it more difficult to see the road. Some
vehicles have fog lights that may be better suited to use in fog, rain, or snow.

-- 63 of 98 --

52
• 	Warning Horn
Your horn can get the attention of another driver. The horn should be used to alert other drivers of a
dangerous situation such as an accident.
Sound your vehicle horn when:
• 	A person on foot or on a bike appears to be moving into your lane of travel.
• 	You are passing a driver who starts to move or turn into your lane.
• 	A driver is not paying attention and doesn’t see you.
• 	Approaching a location where you cannot see what is ahead, such as a steep hill, a sharp curve, or
exiting a narrow valley.
If there is danger, sound a sharp blast on your horn. Sound a sharp blast when:
• 	A child or older person is about to walk, run, or ride into the street.
• 	Another car is in danger of hitting you.
• 	You lose control of your vehicle, and you are moving into the lane of oncoming traffic or in the
direction of pedestrians.
Don’t use your horn:
• 	To encourage other vehicles to speed up.
• 	To inform other drivers of a mistake
• 	To greet a friend on the road
• 	Blind pedestrians
Emergency Flashers/Hazard Lights
If available, use your cell phone to notify authorities of a broken-down vehicle. Many roadways have
signs indicating which phone number to call in an emergency.
Emergency flashers or hazard lights are activated when a driver
pushes the hazard light button/switch. The lights warn other
drivers of an emergency, broken down vehicle, or that your car is
parked on the side of the road.

-- 64 of 98 --

53
LET OTHER DRIVERS KNOW YOUR INTENTIONS
You should warn other drivers you are going to change direction or slow down. This will give them time
to react, if needed, or at least not be surprised by what you do.
Signaling to Change Directions- Proper signaling gives a driver time to react to your moves. Turn signals
should be used before a lane change, a left or right turn, and each time you merge into traffic or park.
• 	If possible, you should signal your intentions to turn at least 100 feet before the turn.
• 	If you plan to turn beyond an intersection, the signal is just after you pass through the
intersection. If you signal earlier, another driver may think you are turning at the intersection.
• 	If another vehicle is about to enter the street between you and where you plan to turn, wait until
you have passed to signal your turn.
• 	After you have made a turn or lane change, turn your signal off. A false turn signal is unsafe.

-- 65 of 98 --

54
ADJUSTING THE VEHICLE SPEED
The faster your vehicle is going, the more distance it takes to slow or stop. The average passenger car
traveling at 55 miles per hour can stop within a total of 225 feet.
You can reduce the time it takes to stop your vehicle by following these rules:
• 	Adjust your speed to road and traffic conditions.
• 	Be aware of your surroundings.
• 	Obey the posted speed limit signs.
Adjust to Road Conditions- There are road conditions that make it necessary to slow down. Drivers
should slow down before a curve, when there are slippery roadways or when standing water is on the
road. If you are traveling at the maximum speed allowed and road conditions become unsafe you should
reduce your speed to conditions.
The only contact your vehicle has with the road is through the tires, so it’s important to know the
condition of your tires. Tires with a degree of wear on the tread could be dangerous in wet or icy road
conditions. Reduce your speed, below the posted speed limit.
Curves- A vehicle can travel much faster in a straight line than it can in a curve.
Traveling too fast around a curve will not allow your tires to grip the road,
causing your vehicle to skid. Slow down before a curve, so you don’t have to
brake in the curve. Braking in a curve can cause the vehicle to skid.

-- 66 of 98 --

55
Adjust to Slippery Roads- Decrease your speed at the first sign of rain, snow, or sleet. These weather
conditions can make the road extremely slippery, which will not allow the tires to grip the surface. On a
wet road, you should reduce your speed to 10 mph. On packed, snow you should cut your speed in half.
On the ice, you must slow to a coast. If possible, do not drive when the roads are icy.
When the road you are driving becomes very slippery due to glare ice; you should stop driving as soon as
you can safely do so.
Here are suggestions to help you spot slippery road conditions:
• 	On cold and wet days, ice may linger in shady spots along the roadway. These areas are the first
to freeze and the last to thaw.
• 	Overpasses and bridges can become some of the first sections of roadways to develop icy
conditions. It is not unusual for bridges and overpasses to be ice covered and the stretches of
roadway leading up to and away from the bridge or overpass to be clear.
• 	Ice can be very wet when it first forms on the highway. When ice is near the freezing point it can
be more slippery than at temperatures well below freezing.
• 	When it starts to rain on a hot day, pavement can be particularly slippery for the first few minutes.
Heat causes the oil in the asphalt to surface on the roadway. The oil makes conditions more
slippery until the rain washes it from the roadway.
Adjust to Water Over the Roadway- When it is raining, or the road is wet; most tires have good traction
up to 35mph. In heavy rain, your tires can lose all traction with the road at 50 mph. The faster you move,
your tires will start to ride up on the water, much like water skis. This process is called “hydroplaning”.
The best way to keep from hydroplaning is to keep your speed down. Worn tires can cause your car to
hydroplane.
What should you do if your vehicle begins to hydroplane (lose traction):
• 	Slowly take your foot off the gas pedal.
• 	Keep the steering wheel straight. Only turn the wheel in case of an emergency. If you have to turn
the wheel, do it slowly, or you will cause the vehicle to lose control or skid.
• 	Do not try to stop or turn until your tires are gripping the road again.

-- 67 of 98 --

56
ADJUSTING TO THE FLOW OF TRAFFIC
Vehicles moving in the same direction at the same speed are less likely to hit another vehicle. Crashes
involving two (2) or more vehicles often happen when drivers go faster or slower than other vehicles
using the same roadway. The safest speed to drive in traffic is the same speed as other vehicles.
Keeping Pace- If you are going faster than other traffic, you will have to keep passing vehicles. Each time
you pass another vehicle there is a chance of a collision. The vehicle you are passing may change lanes
suddenly, or on a two-lane road, an oncoming car may appear suddenly. Slow down and keep pace with
other traffic. Speeding does not save more than a few minutes an hour.
Going much slower than other vehicles traveling in the same direction can be just as bad as speeding. It
causes traffic to back up behind you. If vehicles are accumulating behind you, pull over and allow them to
pass.
Merging With Traffic-When you merge with traffic, try to enter at the same speed as other traffic. High-
speed roadways generally have ramps to give you time to build up speed. Use the ramp to reach the speed
of other vehicles before you pull onto the road. Do not drive to the end of the ramp and stop. Drivers
watching the traffic on the main road may not have time to stop and may hit you from the rear. If you
must wait for a space to enter the roadway, slow down on the ramp to allow room to speed up when it’s
clear to merge. Always check your blind spots by taking a quick glance over your shoulder in the
direction you plan to move into traffic.
The same speed as other traffic.
Exiting Traffic- You should drive at the same speed as other traffic. If
the road you are traveling has exit ramps, do not slow down until you
have moved onto the exit ramp. When you are traveling a high-speed,
two-lane roadway, try not to slow down too soon if you have traffic
following you. Tap your brakes and safely reduce your speed. Use your
turn signals to let other drivers know your intentions.

-- 68 of 98 --

57
Slow-Moving Traffic- Some vehicles are not designed to maneuver at highway speeds. Some may
experience mechanical problems that force the driver to slow the vehicle. As you may approach this type
of traffic, give yourself time to change lanes or slow down. Slowing suddenly can cause a traffic accident.
• 	Watch for trucks and underpowered cars not designed to handle a steep grade. The slower vehicle
can lose speed on long or steep hills, which will take longer to build speed when entering traffic.
• 	Farm tractors, animal-drawn vehicles, and roadway maintenance vehicles usually travel 25 mph
or less. These vehicles should have a slow-moving vehicle sign ( 	) visible from the rear.
Trouble Spots- Be prepared for situations that limit your maneuvering options. In locations where people
and their vehicles are parked; the amount of space you have to maneuver will be limited. Reduce your
speed to react in crowded spaces. Here are some of the places where you need to slow down:
• 	Shopping centers, parking lots, and downtown areas. These are busy areas with vehicles stopping
and starting, and vehicles moving in different directions.
• 	Rush hour with heavy traffic.
• 	Narrow bridges and tunnels. Vehicles meeting close together.
• 	At toll booths (collect a fee to use the roadway) when changing lanes, stopping, and speeding up
to exit a toll booth.
• 	Schools, playgrounds, and residential streets. These areas have children present. Be alert for
children crossing the street.

-- 69 of 98 --

58
VISIBILITY AND REACTION
If a hazard is in your path and you need to stop, allow time and distance. Stopping a vehicle takes much
longer and further to stop even if you have good tires, brakes, and dry pavement:
• 	At 40 mph, it can take about 124 feet total stopping distance.
• 	At 55 mph, it can take about 225 feet in total stopping distance.
If you cannot see a safe length ahead at the speed you are driving, you may not be driving at a safe speed.
Traveling too fast will not allow time to stop for sudden objects on the roadway.
Hazards that limit how well a driver can see:
• 	Darkness- It is harder to see objects at night than during the day. You need the ability to stop
within the distance you can see ahead with your headlights. Your headlights let you see about 400
feet ahead. You should drive at a speed that allows you to stop within this distance, which is
around 50 mph.
• 	Rain, Fog, or Snow- If you cannot see more than 200 feet ahead because of rain or fog, you
should not drive faster than 30 mph. Any time you cannot see the road ahead pull over in a safe
place and wait until the weather clears.
• 	Hills and Curves- You may not know what is on the other side of a hill or just around a curve, be
ready to stop. Adjust your speed so you can stop if needed.
• 	Parked Vehicles- Vehicles parked along the side of the road may block your view. Be ready for a
person(s) getting out of a car or walking out from parked cars. Give parked vehicles as much
room as possible.
• 	Sight-Distance Rule- Drive at a speed where you can safely stop. To determine if you are driving
too fast for the conditions, use the “Four Second Sight Distance Rule.” Pick out a stationary
object as far ahead as you can clearly see (e.g. a sign or utility pole). Start counting “one-one-
thousand (1-1000), Two-one-thousand (2-1000), three-one-thousand (3-1000), four-one-thousand
(4-1000).” If you reach the object before you finish saying “four-one-thousand (4-1000)”, you
need to slow down, you are going too fast. Don’t drive faster than the distance you can see,
otherwise, you could injure/kill yourself or others.
Speed Limits- You must obey speed limits. Speed limits are based on the design of the road, the type
of vehicles used on the road, and the road location. Speed limits are posted for ideal conditions.
Drivers must adjust their speed to current road conditions such as ice or rain. When traveling in bad
weather and you cannot see or if there is heavy traffic, slow down to a safe speed. Even if you are
driving the speed limit, you can get a ticket for traveling too fast for the conditions.
The “Four Second Sight Distance Rule” at
night can help determine a safe distance.
Use your headlights.

-- 70 of 98 --

59
DISTANCE AND REACTION
Because you share the road with other drivers keep more distance between you and other drivers. The
more distance you allow, the more time you must react to a hazard.
Ways to allow extra space:
• 	Following Distance- Rear-end crashes are very common and caused by drivers following too close.
Use the “two (2) second rule” to determine if you are following too close.
Two Second Rule:
There are situations where you need more space in front of your vehicle. You may need to use a four
second rule to be safe.
Slippery Roads- Slippery roads require more stopping distance; you need to allow space in front of you.
If the driver in front of you suddenly stops, you need more room to safely stop.
The Driver Behind You Wants to Pass- Slow down to allow room in front of your vehicle to allow the
passing vehicle to safely merge. If you are being followed too closely on a multi-lane roadway, you
should move into the lane to the right when it is clear.
Following Motorcycles- Allow an extra cushion of space when following a motorcycle. Roads that are
wet, icy or gravel and metal surfaces such as bridges, gratings, and streetcar and railroad tracks can
increase the chance of falling.
Following Drivers Who Cannot See Your Vehicle- Drivers of trucks, buses, vans, or vehicles pulling
campers or trailers may not be able to see you behind them and could suddenly stop. Be prepared.
Reducing your speed and fallback will allow more room to see ahead.
Towing- The extra weight increases your stopping distance.
Poor Visibility- If bad weather makes it hard for you to see you should increase your following distance.
Following Emergency Vehicles- Police vehicles, ambulances, and fire trucks need room to work.
Approaching Railroad Crossings- Allow space for vehicles, which are required to stop at railroad
crossings such as transit buses, school buses, or vehicles carrying hazardous materials.
Stopping on an Incline-Leave extra space when stopped on a hill. Vehicles in front of you could roll
back, when taking off from an incline.
• When the rear of the vehicle ahead passes stationary point,
count the seconds it takes you to reach the same point.
• Count “one-thousand-one (1-1,001), one-thousand-two
(1-1,002).”
• You are following too close if you pass the mark before
you finish counting.
• If you reach the mark before you finish counting, drop
back and then count again. Repeat the process until you
are following no closer than “two seconds.”

-- 71 of 98 --

60
THE SAFETY CUSHION
Traffic to the Rear- Maintaining a safe distance behind your vehicle isn’t always easy.
You can help the driver behind you by keeping a steady speed and signaling in advance when you must
stop or slow down, such as:
• 	Stopping to pick up or let off passengers- Try to find a safe place to stop away from traffic.
• 	Parallel Parking- If you want to parallel park and there is traffic from behind, turn on your signal, pull
next to the space, and allow vehicles from behind to pass before parking.
• 	Driving Slowly- If you drive slower than other vehicles, pull to the side of the road and let the
vehicles pass. There are “turnout” areas on some roadways you can use.
• 	Being Tailgated- if the car behind you is following too close or you are being “tailgated” move into
the right lane, if possible. If there is no right lane, wait until the path ahead is clear and reduce speed.
This will allow the tailgater to drive around you. Never slow down too quickly to discourage a
tailgater, it will increase the risk of being hit from behind.
Traffic to the Side- You need space on both sides of your vehicle, leaving room to turn or change lanes.
• 	Avoid driving next to other vehicles on multi-lane roads. Other drivers may crowd your lane, try
to change lanes, or even pull into your lane. Move ahead or drop behind the other vehicle.
• 	Keep as much space as you can between your vehicle and oncoming vehicles. Do not crowd the
center line on a two (2)-lane road, always drive in the center of your lane.
• 	Make room for a vehicle entering a roadway with two (2) or more lanes.
• 	Keep extra space between your vehicle and parked cars. A pedestrian could step out from a
parked vehicle, between vehicles or a vehicle could be pulling out of a parking space.
• 	Use the “split difference rule”. This is when you split the difference between two (2) hazards. For
example: steer the middle course between oncoming and parked vehicles. If one appears more
dangerous than the other, leave more room on the side of the vehicle that is more dangerous. If
the vehicle is a tractor-trailer, leave more room on the side that will pass the truck.
• 	When possible, take potential hazards one at a time. You are overtaking a bicycle and an
oncoming vehicle is approaching, slow down and let the vehicle pass before you pass the bicycle.
Give extra space to pedestrians and bicycles.
Watch out for children, they can move
quickly and without warning. Do not share a
lane with a pedestrian or bicyclist; wait until
it is safe to pass in the adjoining lane.

-- 72 of 98 --

61
Merging- When merging with other traffic, you need a gap of about four (4) seconds. If you move in the
middle of a four (4) second gap, your vehicle, and the vehicle behind you will have a following distance
of two (2) seconds. When changing lanes, entering a roadway, or merging with another travel lane, you
should keep a four (4) second gap.
• 	Do not try to merge in a small gap. A small gap can quickly become even smaller. Enter a gap
that gives you a large cushion of space.
• 	If you are going to cross more than one (1) lane of traffic, take one lane at a time.
Intersecting Traffic- When crossing traffic, you need a large gap to get across the road. When entering
traffic, allow enough space to turn and get up to speed.
• 	When crossing traffic, leave enough space to clear any hazards. Stopping halfway across the road
is safe when there is a median divider large enough for your vehicle to enter. Never stop in a
median divider too small for your vehicle, where your vehicle may be left sticking out in the line
of other vehicles.
• 	If you are turning left, make sure there are no vehicles or pedestrians blocking your path. You do
not want to be halfway across a lane of traffic waiting for a clear path with oncoming traffic
moving in your direction.
• 	Even with a green light, do not start across the intersection until traffic is clear. You could get
caught in the intersection when the light changes to red and block traffic. Drivers can be ticketed
for blocking an intersection.
• 	Do not turn because an approaching vehicle has a turn signal on. The driver may intend on
turning beyond the street where you are sitting, or the driver may have forgotten to turn the signal
off from a prior turn. A signal on a motorcycle does not automatically cancel. Wait until the
driver starts to turn and then start your turn when it is safe.
Passing Distance- Whenever signs and road markings allow you to pass, you will need to judge whether
you have enough space and time to pass. Do not count on having enough time to pass several cars at once.
Be safe. As a rule, only pass one vehicle at a time.

-- 73 of 98 --

62
Oncoming Vehicles- At a speed of 55 mph, you need about ten (10) seconds to pass. This means you
need a ten (10) second gap in oncoming traffic and sight distance to pass. When passing a vehicle you
must judge whether or not you have enough space and time to safely pass.
At 55 mph you and your oncoming vehicle(s) will travel over 800 feet in ten (10) seconds. This means a
driver will need over 1600 feet or 1/3 of a mile to safely pass. It can be hard to judge the speed of
oncoming vehicles at large distances. A vehicle too far away appears to be stationary (still). If you can see
the vehicle coming closer, it may be traveling too fast to pass. When a driver isn’t sure whether or not
there is enough time to safely pass, wait until there is more space before passing.
Hills and Curves
Intersections- It is dangerous to pass where a vehicle may enter or cross the road. Such places include
intersections, railroad crossings, and shopping center entrances. When you pass a vehicle your view of
other people, vehicles or trains can be blocked. Drivers turning right into an approaching lane will not
expect you within their lane and may not look before turning.
Drivers should not pass if you are within, 1/3 of a mile of a
hill or curve.
Anytime your view is blocked by a hill or a curve, you
should always assume an oncoming vehicle could be
coming toward you. Always expect an oncoming car and
never pass within a 1/3 mile of a curve or hill.

-- 74 of 98 --

63
Lane Obstructions- Before you pass, look ahead for road conditions and traffic that could cause other
vehicles to move into your lane. Don’t think other drivers will make room for you when passing. Never
pass unless you have enough space to return to the driving lane.
Before you return to the driving lane, be sure to leave enough room between your vehicle and the vehicle
you have passed. At night, when you can see both headlights of the vehicle you passed in your rear-view
mirror, it is safe to return to the driving lane.
LEFT LANE ON A MULTILANE HIGHWAY FOR PASSING ONLY
Arkansas Code Annotated 27-51-301 states that a vehicle shall not be driven upon the left lane of a
multilane highway, EXCEPT as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules
governing that movement.
(2) When all other lanes for traveling in the same direction are closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
(3) When all other lanes for traveling in the same direction are in disrepair or are in an otherwise
undrivable or unsafe condition; or
(4) When a vehicle is preparing to exit the multilane highway on the left
You might lose your space for passing because of:
• 	People or bicyclists near the road
• 	A narrow bridge or other situation that causes reduced
lane width.
• 	A patch of ice, pothole, or object on the road

-- 75 of 98 --

64
CHAPTER 6: TRACTOR-TRAILER RIGS –
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW (REQUIRED)
It may appear obvious, but tractor-trailer rigs are not large cars. To reduce the chance of a crash with a
large tractor-trailer, motorists must be familiar with a truck’s capabilities and common maneuvers.
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), 72 percent of fatal crashes
involving two or more vehicles, in which one of the vehicles is a tractor-trailer, the cause is usually
attributed to a car.
Braking
Tractor-trailers take longer to stop than a car traveling at the same speed. The average passenger car
traveling at 55 miles per hour can stop in about 225 feet. A fully loaded tractor-trailer traveling at 55 miles
per hour may take more than 335 feet to come to a complete stop. That is the length of a football field.
Turning
Any turning vehicle’s rear wheels follow a shorter path than the
front wheels. A longer vehicle makes a greater difference when
turning. That’s why the drivers of tractor-trailers must often
swing out to the left as the first step in making a right turn.
When following a tractor-trailer, watch the turn signals before
trying to pass. If a left turn is imminent (going to happen), wait
a moment to check and see which way the driver is signaling to
turn before passing on the right.

-- 76 of 98 --

65
AVOIDING THE TRACTOR-TRAILER “NO ZONE”
It is important that your vehicle can be seen whenever you are driving. Many motorists assume truckers
can see the road better because they sit higher than the driver of a car. While tractor-trailer drivers have a
better forward view from the cabs of their trucks and have bigger mirrors, they still have serious blind
spots. A car can disappear; up to 20 feet in front of the cab, on either side of the tractor-trailer
(particularly alongside the cab), and up to 200 feet in the rear of the truck.

-- 77 of 98 --

66
(REQUIRED)
Motorists remaining in the blind spots along the sides and in the rear of a truck hinder the trucker’s ability
to take evasive action in avoiding a dangerous situation and the possibility of a crash. An excellent rule
for motorists sharing the road with a tractor-trailer is, “if you can’t see the truck driver in the tractor side
mirror, the driver can’t see you.”
Maneuverability
Trucks are designed to carry many products and are not designed to be as maneuverable as cars. Trucks
have longer stopped and acceleration distances, take wider areas to turn, and weigh much more than cars.
The following list is the most common mistakes motorists must avoid when driving around trucks:
• Cutting off a truck in traffic or on the highway to reach an exit or turn. Cutting into the open space in
front of a truck removes the truck driver’s cushion of safety. Trying to beat a truck to a single-lane
construction zone, for instance, represents a particularly dangerous situation. Take a moment to slow
down and exit behind the truck, it will only take you a few extra seconds.
• Don’t linger alongside a truck when passing. Always pass a tractor-trailer completely and on the left
side. If you linger when passing a truck, your position makes it impossible for the truck driver to take
evasive action if an obstacle appears in the road ahead.
• When following behind a truck, if you can’t see the truck driver’s rear-view mirrors, there is no way
the truck driver can see you. Tailgating a truck or car is dangerous because you take away your own
cushion of safety if the vehicle in front of you stops short. Also, if the vehicle you are following hits
something in the road, you will have no time to react before it hits the front of your car.
• Never underestimate the size and speed of an approaching tractor-trailer. The size of a tractor-trailer
can appear to be traveling at a slower speed than reality. A large number of car-truck collisions take
place at intersections because the driver of the car does not realize how close the truck is or how
quickly it is approaching.

-- 78 of 98 --

67
CHAPTER 7: SHARING THE ROAD WITH
BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Bicycles have the same rights and responsibilities on the streets as other vehicles and must share lanes of
traffic. Bicycles are required to travel on the right-hand side of the road with other traffic. Bicyclists are
not allowed to travel facing oncoming traffic. They should ride as close to the right side of the road to
avoid road hazards that could cause them to swerve into traffic. When you’re sharing the road with
bicycles, you should always expect the rider to make sudden moves. Trash, minor oil slicks, a pothole or
crack in the concrete, a barking dog, a parked car, or a car door opening, and other surprises can force a
bicycle rider to swerve suddenly in front of you.
When cyclists are passing parked cars, they tend to move away from the cars toward the center of the lane
to avoid injuring – or being injured by – people getting out of cars. In such cases, the cyclist is operating
the bicycle properly to avoid injury. Drivers should give the cyclist the entire lane, if possible. When road
conditions prevent the entire lane, pass the cyclist with extreme caution. Cyclists who are not riding on
the right side of the lane are not being careless but attempting to account for traffic conditions and/or
preparing to make a left turn.
Bicycles are hard to see. The riders are exposed and easily injured in a collision. Oncoming bicycle traffic
is often overlooked.
Safety Tips for Motor Vehicle Drivers:
• 	The most common cause of a collision is a driver turning left in front of an oncoming bicycle or
turning right, across the path of the bicycle.
• 	Drivers often fail to pick the bicyclist out of the traffic scene or inaccurately judge the speed of the
cyclist making a left turn.
• 	Drivers overtaking a bicyclist and then making a right turn in front of the cyclist can cause an
accident. Look left, then right and left again to make sure you see the cyclist and know his speed
before you turn.
• 	Merge with bicycle traffic when preparing for a right turn. Don’t turn directly across the path of a cyclist.
• 	Watch for young bicycle riders turning in front of you, who may not look or signal, especially if the
rider is a child.
• 	Most bicyclists maintain eye contact with drivers around them when making a turn. Before turning, a
driver should attempt to gain and maintain eye contact with the cyclist to ensure a safer turn.
• 	Allow plenty of room when passing a bicycle rider.
• 	A driver should never attempt to pass between a bicyclist and oncoming vehicles on a two-lane road.
If you are overtaking a bicycle and an oncoming car is approaching, you should slow down and let
the vehicle pass before you pass the bicycle.
• 	Never pass a bicycle if the street is too narrow or you could force the bicyclist too close to parked
vehicles. Wait until there is enough room to let you safely pass.
• 	If you are about to pass a bicycle on a narrow road and you think the rider doesn’t know you’re
coming, tap your horn gently and briefly as a signal that you’re going to pass. Don’t blast your horn
or otherwise startle or try to intimidate the rider.

-- 79 of 98 --

68
Residential Areas Are Danger Zones
Bicyclists may ride in the middle of the street, and disregard stop signs and traffic signals. Be careful in
all neighborhood areas where children and teenagers might be riding.
• Children riding bicycles create special problems for drivers. Children are not capable of proper
judgment in determining traffic conditions. Drivers should be alert to the possibility of sudden
movement and sudden changes in direction when children or bicycles are present.
• Watch out for bikes coming out of driveways, behind parked cars, or from other obstructions.
• Bicyclists riding at night present visibility problems for drivers. At night, watch the side of the road
for bicyclists. Bicyclists are required to have proper illumination, front light, and rear reflector.
Drivers should be aware that bicyclists are not easily seen. Lights from approaching traffic may make
them even harder to see at night.
• If you see a bicyclist with a red or orange pennant flag attached to the bike, slow down; this is a
symbol to indicate the rider has impaired hearing.
Lane Positions for Bicycles
When a bicycle rider and a vehicle share the same lane, they are required to ride side by side, in the same
lane. Even then, there are certain times when a bicycle can take the full lane.
A bicyclist should be allowed full use of the lane when:
• 	The rider is overtaking and passing another vehicle going in the same direction.
• 	If the lane is marked and signed for bicycle use only, drivers must NEVER use that lane as a turning
lane, passing lane or for parking.
• 	The bicyclist is getting in place for a left turn at an intersection or turning left into a private road or
driveway.
• 	There are unsafe conditions in the roadway such as parked cars, moving vehicles or machinery, fixed
obstacles, pedestrians, animals, potholes, or debris.
• 	The lane is too narrow for both a car and a bicycle to safely share the lane. In this case, it is safest to
let the bicycle take the full lane.
Bicycle Hand Signals

-- 80 of 98 --

69
Sharing the Road with Motorcyclists
Today’s motorcycle riders are often friends, relatives, and neighbors, but still many car drivers have not
adjusted to motorcycles appearing in traffic. Traveling by motorcycle is appealing to some people; they
are fuel and space efficient and can be just plain fun to ride, but there is a flip side. Motorcyclists are
more vulnerable to injury than a car driver if involved in an accident. Research shows that over two-thirds
of car/motorcycle accidents are the result of a car driver turning in front of a motorcyclist. Motorcyclists
and cars need to mix in traffic without causing harm to each other.
For various reasons, drivers may not always see the motorcyclist. Approximately one-third of all
motorcycle crashes involve another vehicle. A few of the most common reasons are:
1. Many drivers tend to look for other cars – not for motorcyclists.
2. The profile of a motorcycle is much smaller than a car, making an approaching motorcyclist harder to see.
3. Estimating the distance and speed of a motorcycle is more difficult than estimating that of a car.
4. Motorcycle riding requires frequent lane movements to adjust to changing road conditions.
Situations When Crashes Are Most Likely to Occur
Left Turns - The most common crash between cars and motorcycles is at an
intersection when the driver of a car is making a left turn in front of a
motorcycle (Failure to Yield Right of Way). Over 40% of all motorcycle
crashes occur at intersections. Nearly 60% of those crashes were caused by
the other vehicles turning left in front of the motorcyclist.
Changing Lanes and Car’s Blind Spots - Motorcyclists are often hidden in a
vehicle’s blind spot or missed in a quick look due to their smaller size. Always
make a visual check for motorcycles by checking mirrors and blind spots before
entering or leaving a lane of traffic and at intersections.
Hazardous Road Conditions - Road conditions that are a minor annoyance to you may pose a major
hazard to motorcyclists. Motorcyclists may suddenly change speed or adjust their position within a lane in
a reaction to the weather or road and traffic conditions such as potholes, gravel, railroad crossings, and
wet or slippery surfaces which impair the motorcyclist’s braking and handling abilities. Expect and allow
room for such actions by the motorcyclist.
Strong Winds - A strong gust of wind can move a motorcycle across an entire lane
if the rider isn’t prepared for it. Wind gusts from large trucks in the other lane can
be a hazard.
Obstructed View by Larger Vehicles - A large vehicle such as a van, bus, or truck
can block a motorcycle from a driver's view causing the motorcyclist to suddenly
appear from nowhere.
How Can I Drive Aware?
Look Twice for Motorcyclists - Although you may not see any cars coming, be
aware there may be a motorcycle. Be careful at intersections and always take a
second look for a motorcycle before turning at an intersection, particularly when
making left turns.
Special Note: If you
drive aware of
motorcyclists in these
situations, you can help
make the streets and roads
safer for everyone.

-- 81 of 98 --

70
Signal Your Intentions
Always signal before changing lanes or merging with traffic. This allows the motorcycle to anticipate
traffic flow and find a safe lane position. Signal even if you don’t see cars or motorcycles. Be careful
when making left turns across lanes of oncoming or approaching traffic. Look carefully in all directions
for approaching motorcyclists. Don’t be fooled by a flashing turn signal. Motorcycle signals don’t
automatically cancel, and riders forget to turn them off. Wait and see if the motorcycle is going to turn
before you proceed.
Respect a Motorcycle
Allow the motorcyclist a full lane width. Although it may seem as though there is enough room in the
traffic lane for an automobile and a motorcycle, the motorcycle is entitled to a full lane and may need
room to maneuver safely. Do not attempt to share the lane with a motorcycle.
Allow Plenty of Space When Following a Motorcycle
The slightest contact can mean a spill or injury for the rider. Allow more following distance, at least four
(4) to six (6) seconds, when following a motorcycle so the motorcyclist has enough time to maneuver or
stop in an emergency. In dry conditions, motorcycles can stop more quickly than a car.
For more information on Motorcycles, see the online Motorcycle Endorsement Study Guide at
https://www.dps.arkansas.gov/law-enforcement/arkansas-state-police/services-programs/driver-
examination/ or contact the Motorcycle Safety Coordinator at (501) 618-8127.

-- 82 of 98 --

71
CHAPTER 8: DRIVING FITNESS
Drivers should take extra time to be safe. Operating a motor vehicle can injure or kill us. To be a safe driver,
it takes a lot of skill and judgment. Your ability to be a safe driver depends on seeing clearly, not being tired,
and driving without consuming alcohol or illegal drugs. In other words, stay in “shape” before driving.
Vision
Good vision is a must for safe driving. If you cannot see clearly, you will have trouble identifying traffic,
and road conditions, spotting potential trouble and reacting in a timely manner. Arkansas requires that
you pass a vision test before you get a driver’s license. You must have at least twenty-seventy (20/70)
vision in at least one eye, with or without corrective lenses.
Other important aspects are:
• Peripheral Vision – Take advantage of peripheral vision, the field of vision from the corner of your
eye. This lets you spot vehicles and other potential trouble on either side of you while you look
ahead. Because you cannot focus on things to the side, use your side mirrors and glance to the side.
• Judging Distance and Speed – Even if you can see the road ahead, you may not be able to judge
distances or speed at times. Many people have problems judging distances and speeds; it takes a lot
of practice to do both. Judgment is very important in knowing how far you are from other vehicles,
judging safe gaps when merging and when passing on two-lane roads.
• Night Vision – Many people can see clearly in the daytime but have trouble seeing at night. All
people have problems seeing at night. Some drivers have problems with glare while driving at night,
especially with the glare of oncoming headlights. If you have problems seeing at night, don’t drive
unless it’s necessary and if you do, be very careful.
Because safe driving depends on how well you see, drivers should have their eyes checked every year by
an eye specialist. You may not know you have poor vision unless your eyes are tested. If you need to
wear glasses or contact lenses for driving, remember to:
• 	Wear corrective lenses, if prescribed, when you drive. If you have a restriction “B” restriction on
your driver’s license, you must drive with your eyewear. If stopped by law enforcement, a driver
can be ticketed for failing to wear corrective lenses.
• 	Keep an extra pair of glasses in your vehicle. This can be helpful if you forget or misplace your
glasses.
• 	Avoid dark or tinted glasses/contact lenses at night, even if it helps with glare. The problem is
these types of lenses cut down too much light and light is needed to see the road ahead.
Hearing
Hearing can be helpful when driving. The sound of horns, sirens, or screeching tires can warn you of
danger. Hearing problems can happen when you least expect them. Deaf or hearing-impaired drivers can
adjust to conditions and be safe drivers by relying on their vision to stay alert. Studies have shown driving
records for the hearing impaired to be as good as those with good hearing.

-- 83 of 98 --

72
Fatigue
You cannot drive safely when tired. A safe driver must be aware of their surroundings to avoid danger.
Being rested can keep you from falling asleep at the wheel and crashing.
There are things you can do to keep from getting tired on a long trip:
• 	Try to get a good night’s sleep before you leave.
• 	Do not leave on a trip if you are tired. Plan your trips so you can leave when you are rested.
• 	Do not take any medicine that might make you drowsy.
• 	Eat light meals prior to departure. Large, full meals tend to cause drowsiness.
• 	Take breaks. Stop regularly or as needed to walk around, breathe fresh air, and refresh with
coffee, soda, or juice. The few minutes spent on a rest break can save your life. Allow plenty of
time to complete your trip safely.
• 	Avoid long trips during hours your body is accustomed to resting.
• 	Never drive if you are sleepy. It is better to stop and sleep for a few hours than take a chance you
can stay awake.
Health
Many health problems can affect your driving- a bad cold, infection, or a virus. Even smaller problems
such as a stiff neck, a cough, or a sore leg can affect your driving. If you are not feeling well and you have
places to go; let someone else drive.
Epilepsy- Epilepsy is usually not dangerous when under medical control. In Arkansas, you may drive
with epilepsy, if you are under the care of a doctor and seizure free for one year.
Diabetes- Diabetics, who take insulin, should not drive when there is a chance of going into shock.
Diabetic shock could result from skipping a meal or snack, or from taking the wrong amount of insulin.
You should have someone else drive when adjusting to insulin dosage. Remember to have your eyes
checked regularly for possible night blindness and other vision problems.
Heart Condition- People with heart disease, high blood pressure, or circulation problems may be in
danger of blackouts, fainting, or a heart attack and should not get behind the wheel. If you are being
treated for a heart condition, ask your doctor before driving.
Emotional Distress- Emotions can have a great effect on your driving ability. You may not be able to
drive if you are overly worried, excited, afraid, angry, or just “down.”
• 	If you are angry or excited, give yourself time to calm down or cool off. Take a short walk but
stay off the road until you have calmed down.
• 	If you are worried or “down” about something, try to keep your mind on your driving. Some
people find the radio helps.
• 	If you are impatient, give yourself extra driving time. Leave a few minutes early. If you have plenty
of time, you may not speed or do other things that could cause a traffic ticket or cause a crash.

-- 84 of 98 --

73
DRINKING AND DRIVING
Alcohol is involved in approximately thirty-eight (38) percent of traffic crashes in which someone is
killed. If you drink alcohol, your chances of being in a crash are much greater than a person who does not
drink alcohol.
There is no safe alcohol concentration to operate a vehicle. Experienced drivers are affected by alcohol
even if they have been driving for many years and new drivers are even more affected by alcohol because
they are still in the learning process. Every driver is affected by alcohol; therefore, you should never drink
and drive.
Drinking alcohol and driving is dangerous, and the penalties are very severe. People who drink and drive
risk being fined more than any other violation. These drivers will experience higher insurance rates, loss
of license, possible ignition interlock devices, and jail sentences. Most importantly, drinking and driving
can cause death or injury to yourself or others.
Alcohol Impairment
Alcohol reduces important skills you need to drive safely. After you drink alcohol, it goes from your
stomach into the small intestine where most of it is absorbed into the blood, then transports the alcohol to
all parts of the body. Alcohol in the bloodstream reaches the brain in fifteen (15) to forty (40) minutes.
Once in the brain, alcohol affects areas that control judgment and skill. The first driving ability to be
affected by alcohol is judgment. Good judgment is important to driving and one reason why drinking
alcohol then driving is so dangerous. Judgment helps you to decide when to stop drinking. When people
consume alcohol, they lose their ability to judge, until they’ve had too much to drink and it’s too late. By
the time you begin to feel the effect of the alcohol, your judgment is severely affected.
Alcohol slows your reflexes/reaction time, reduces your ability to see clearly, and makes you less alert.
As the amount of alcohol in your body increases, it worsens your judgment and decreases your skills.
This will cause drivers problems when judging distances, speeds, and the movement of other vehicles. An
even more dangerous problem is not being able to control your vehicle.

-- 85 of 98 --

74
Body Metabolism
If you drink alcohol, do not drive. How many alcoholic drinks does it take to affect your driving, one
drink? Two or more drinks may cause impairment, and you could be arrested. The first driving ability to
be affected by alcohol is judgment.
When drinking socially, arrange to go with two or more persons, where one of you can be the designated
driver. If you do not have a designated driver, use public transportation or a cab. Never get behind the
wheel if you have been drinking, the risk you are taking isn’t worth the consequences of killing yourself
or others.
Alcohol and the Law
Breath Alcohol Concentration (BrAC) is the alcohol in your breath and Blood Alcohol Concentration
(BAC) is the concentration of alcohol in the blood. Blood alcohol concentration can be determined by a
blood or urine test. The law enforcement officer chooses which test (breath, urine, or saliva) to request. If
a law enforcement officer instructs you to take an alcohol test you are compelled by law to do so. You
can lose your driver’s license if you refuse to take an alcohol test.
If you are found guilty of an alcohol violation and it is your first conviction, you will be fined from $150
to $1000, in addition to court costs. You could also be sentenced to one (1) year in jail, and your license
could be suspended for 120 days. For second offense and convictions that follow the second offense the
penalties are much worse, you could be sent to prison.
1.5-ounce
(shot glass)
80 proof
liquor
6-ounce
glass of
table wine
12-ounce
can of
beer
A single drink is considered 1.5 ounces of (80) proof liquor (one
shot glass) straight or with a mixer; a 6-ounce glass of wine or a
12-ounce container of beer. Specialty drinks can have more
alcohol, and one drink may equal several normal drinks.
The body rids itself of alcohol at a rate of one (1) drink per hour.
There is no way to sober up quickly. Coffee, fresh air, exercise
or a cold shower will not help. Remember: Food slows the rate
at which alcohol enters the blood; it will not prevent you from
getting intoxicated. The only thing that will sober you up is time.
If you are arrested for drinking and driving, the penalties are severe. You will be
arrested for driving while intoxicated with an alcohol concentration of 0.08% or
more in the breath (grams/210 liters) or blood (grams/100 milliliters, the same
as 0.08%).
In Arkansas, if involved in a traffic crash or involved in a serious traffic offense,
you can be charged with DWI with a blood alcohol content between 0.08% and
0.04%.

-- 86 of 98 --

75
In Arkansas, you cannot buy or consume alcohol under the age of twenty-one (21). You can be arrested
for Underage Driving Under the Influence if your alcohol concentration is 0.02%breath or blood
alcohol concentration.
If you are found guilty after the proper test(s), you could have your license revoked until you reach
twenty-one (21) years of age and could be fined $2000. In addition, any person under twenty-one (21)
years of age convicted of purchasing or being in possession of alcohol will have their driving privileges
suspended, revoked, or disqualified.
Other Types of Drugs and Driving
There are many types of drugs, in addition to alcohol that affects a person’s driving ability. The effects of
drugs are worse than those caused by alcohol. Many prescription drugs or over-the-counter drugs (no
prescription) such as drugs for headaches, colds, hay fever, or other allergies or drugs to calm the nerves
can make a person drowsy and affect their driving skills. Pep pills, “uppers”, and diet pills can make a
driver feel more alert for a short time. Later, these drugs can cause a person to be nervous, dizzy, unable
to concentrate, and have poor vision. Other drugs can affect your reflexes, judgment, vision, and alertness
in ways like alcohol. Other drugs cannot increase concentration and do not stop impairment.
Some prescription drugs and nonprescription drugs may impair your driving. Check the label for
warnings or ask your doctor or pharmacists for possible side effects before driving.
Never drink alcohol while you are taking medications or other drugs. These drugs may multiply the
effects of alcohol or have additional effects of their own. These effects not only reduce your ability to be a
safe driver, but the effects could cause serious health problems or even death. Illegal drugs are not good
for your health and affect your ability to be a safe driver. For example, studies have shown that people
who use marijuana make more mistakes, have more trouble adjusting to glare, and get arrested for traffic
violations more than other drivers.

-- 87 of 98 --

76
ARKANSAS ORGAN & TISSUE DONOR INFORMATION
Following the successful completion of driver testing, Arkansas license applicants will be asked whether
they wish to register as organ or tissue donors. The words “Organ Donor” will be printed on the front of
the Arkansas driver’s license for those individuals who choose to participate as registered organ donors.
Arkansas driver license holders, identified as organ donors, will be listed in a state registry. The
donor driver’s license and registry assist emergency services and medical personnel to identify the
individuals who have chosen to offer upon death, their body’s organs to help another person have a
second chance at life (i.e. the transplant of a heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, pancreas, corneas, bone,
skin, heart valves or tissue).
It will be important, should you choose to participate in the donor program to speak with your family
about the decision so that your wishes can be carried out upon your death. Please review some of the facts
you should know about organ and tissue donations:
 	Thousands of people are on waiting lists to receive organ transplants.
 	Approximately 17 patients on average die each day while waiting on a suitable organ donation
(one person every 85 minutes).
 	The decision to become an organ or tissue donor will not influence the quality of emergency care
or medical treatment an organ donor might receive. Organ donations may only occur after every
effort has been made to save the donor’s life.
 	Organ and tissue donations do not change the way the body may appear. Organ and tissue donors
are treated with respect and dignity. Organ harvesting occurs through a sterile surgical process
under the strict guidance of a physician.
 	The families of organ and tissue donors are not expected to pay for any medical bills associated
with the organ harvesting process.
 	Organ and tissue donations are considered gifts and family survivors of a donor receive no
compensation.
 	While many religious orders or denominations may not oppose the principles of human organ and
tissue donations, specific questions relating to this matter should be directed to your family pastor,
cleric, or religious leader.
*Source material from Arkansas Regional Organ Recovery Agency
The Arkansas Organ Donor Registry is managed by the Arkansas Regional Organ Recovery Agency
(ARORA). For more information about organ and tissue donation, contact ARORA by calling (501) 907-
9150 or (866)660-5433, or log onto the ARORA website at www.arora.org.

-- 88 of 98 --

77
CHAPTER 9: EMERGENCIES
All drivers sooner or later find themselves in an emergency. Be careful and be aware of situations that
could cause you driving problems. If you are prepared, you may be able to prevent any serious outcomes.
Vehicle Emergencies
There is always a chance of a vehicle problem while driving. You should follow the recommended
maintenance schedule in the vehicle owner’s manual.
Brake Failure
If your brakes stop working:
• 	Pump the brake pedal several times. This will often build up enough brake pressure to allow you
to stop.
• 	If that does not work, use the parking brake. Pull on the parking brake handle slowly or slowly press
the emergency brake pedal so you will not lock the rear wheels and cause a skid. Be ready to release
the brake if the vehicle does start to skid.
• 	If that does not work, start shifting to lower gears and look for a safe place to slow to a stop. Make
sure the car is off the roadway. Do not drive the vehicle without brakes.
Blowouts
If you have a sudden tire blowout:
• 	Hold the steering wheel tightly and keep the vehicle going straight.
• 	Slow gradually. Take your foot off the gas pedal and use the brakes lightly.
• 	Do not stop on the road if possible. Pull off the road in a safe place.
Engine Failure
If your engine fails, you should:
• 	Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Be aware that the steering may be difficult to turn, but you
can turn it.
• 	Pull off the roadway. The brakes will still work but you may have to push very hard on the brake
pedal.
Headlight Failure
If your headlights suddenly go out:
• 	Try the headlight switch a few times.
• 	If that does not work, put on the emergency flashers, turn signals, or fog lights, if you have them.
• 	Pull off the road as soon as possible.
Faulty Accelerator
The motor keeps running faster and faster:
• 	Keep your eyes on the road.
• 	Quickly shift to neutral.
• 	Pull off the road when safe to do so.
• 	Turn off the engine.

-- 89 of 98 --

78
Avoiding Collisions
When it looks as if a collision may happen, many drivers panic and fail to act. In some cases, they do act
but do something that does not help to reduce the chance of the collision. There is something you can do
to avoid the crash or reduce the results of the crash. In avoiding a collision, drivers have three options: (1)
Stop, (2) Turn, and (3) Speed Up.
Stopping
Many newer vehicles have ABS (Antilock Braking System). Be sure to read the vehicle owner’s manual
on how to use the ABS. The ABS system will allow you to stop without skidding if you need to stop
quickly.
With ABS – If you have an antilock braking system and you need to stop quickly:
• Press on the brake pedal as hard as you can and keep pressing on it.
• You might feel the brake pedal pushing back when the ABS is working. Do not let up on the brake
pedal. The ABS system will only work with the brake pedal pushed down.
Without ABS – If your vehicle does not have antilock brakes:
• You can cause the vehicle to go into a skid if you brake too hard.
• Apply the brakes as hard as you can without locking the brake.
• If the brakes lock up, you will feel the vehicle start to skid. Quickly let up on the brake pedal.
• As soon as the vehicle stops skidding, push down on the brake pedal again. Keep doing this until the
vehicle has stopped.
Turning
In most cases, a driver can turn the vehicle quicker than it can be stopped. You should consider turning to
avoid a collision.
Make sure you grip the steering wheel with both hands. The best way to grip the steering wheel is to place
your hands at 10 o’clock and 2 o’clock positions. Once you have turned away or changed lanes to avoid
danger, you must be ready to keep the vehicle under control. Some drivers steer away from one collision
only to end up in another.
With ABS – One aspect of having ABS is you can turn your vehicle while braking without skidding.
This is helpful for turning, stopping, or slowing down.
Without ABS – If you do not have ABS, use a different procedure to turn quickly. Step on the brake
pedal, then let up and turn the steering wheel. Braking will somewhat slow the vehicle, by putting
more weight on the front tires for a quicker turn. Do not lock up the front wheels when braking or
when turning so sharp that the vehicle can only plow ahead. Generally, it is better to run off the road
than crash head-on into another vehicle.
Accelerating
Sometimes it is best or in some cases necessary to speed up to avoid a collision. You may want to
accelerate when another vehicle is about to hit you from the side or from behind. Another case in which
you might need to accelerate would be when there is space in front of you to get out of danger. Be sure to
slow down once the danger has passed.

-- 90 of 98 --

79
Skids
Roads can be unsafe even under normal conditions; but even more dangerous when covered with water,
snow, or ice. Driving at a high speed increases the possibility of a skid if you turn or stop suddenly.
If your vehicle begins to skid:
• Stay off the Brake – Your brakes will not work until the vehicle slows down. Your vehicle could
skid more if you hit your brakes.
• Steer – Turn the steering wheel in the direction you want the vehicle to go. As soon as the vehicle
begins to straighten out, turn the steering wheel back the other way. If you fail to turn the wheel
back the other way, your vehicle may swing around in the other direction and start a new skid.
• Continue to Steer – Continue to correct your steering, left and right, until you gain control of
the vehicle.
Skids (black marks on pavement) are caused
when tires can no longer grip the road. You
cannot control a vehicle when it is skidding.
The vast majority of skids are caused by drivers
traveling too fast for the conditions.

-- 91 of 98 --

80
Traffic Crashes
Do not stop at a crash unless you are involved, or emergency help has not arrived. Focus on your driving
and keep moving, watch for people in or near the road. Do not drive to the scene of an accident, fire, or
another disaster. Your vehicle could block the way for police, firefighters, ambulances, tow trucks, and
other rescue vehicles.
No matter how well you drive, there may be a time when you are involved in a crash. If you are involved
in a crash, you must stop. Arkansas Law requires that if you are involved in a traffic crash you should,
move the vehicle from the roadway; so, it doesn’t block traffic.
In case you are involved in a crash with a parked vehicle, you must try to locate the owner. Any person
injured, killed, or has property damage exceeding $1000; a driver must notify the police immediately. A
driver cannot leave the scene of a crash with injury or death until police have talked with the driver(s) and
collected all information they need about the crash.
What should I do if I am involved in a traffic crash?
• Stop your vehicle at or near the accident site. Move it off the road, if possible, so it does not
block traffic.
• Do not stand or walk in traffic lanes. You could be struck by another vehicle.
• Turn off the ignition of wrecked vehicles. Do not smoke near a wrecked vehicle. Fuel could have
spilled, and you could cause a fire.
• If there are electrical wires down, do not go near the wires.
• Make sure other traffic will not be involved in the crash. Use flares or other warning devices to
alert traffic of the accident, but again, be aware of any spilled fuel or fuel leaks.

-- 92 of 98 --

81
Assisting the Injured
• Help anyone who cannot move or anyone unconscious. Check for breathing, and then check
for bleeding.
• Call for help. Make sure police are notified with a precise location of the crash scene and provide the
dispatchers any warnings such as gas spills, fire, or downed electric lines, and follow up with the
same information given to rescue and emergency medical personnel.
• Do not move the injured unless they are trapped inside a burning vehicle or another immediate form
of danger.
• If there is bleeding, supply direct pressure to the wound. Even severe bleeding can almost always be
stopped or slowed by using direct pressure on a wound.
• Do not give the injured anything to drink, even water, until medical personnel is on the scene.
• To prevent an injured person from going into shock, cover the individual with a blanket or warm
clothing such as a coat or jacket.
Keep a Record of Crash Information
• Get the names and addresses of all the people involved in the accident and any witnesses. Make sure
to get the names and addresses of any injured persons.
• Exchange information with other drivers involved in the crash. (I.e., Name, address, driver’s license
number, insurance company, policy number if available vehicle information such as license plate,
make, model, and year of the vehicle.
• Record any damage to the vehicles involved in the crash.
• Provide information to the police or other emergency officials if requested.
• You must report the accident to the Office of Driver Services division of the Department of Finance
and Administration if there is an injury, a death, or property damage of more than $3000 to one
person’s property. Accident forms are available at Office of Driver Services offices or from most
insurance agents. You must file the report within thirty (30) days of the accident. If you are injured
and unable to complete the report, someone may file on your behalf.

-- 93 of 98 --

82
CHAPTER 10: SKILLS TEST GUIDELINES
Inspecting Your Vehicle
Take a moment before you drive to check the safety of your vehicle. A vehicle in poor operating
condition is unsafe and could cause you to become disabled along the roadside or even cause an accident.
Vehicles in sub-standard operating conditions may not respond well to a driver’s reaction in an
emergency or collision. A vehicle in good operating condition will always provide a greater margin for
safe driving.
Follow these safety tips for inspecting your vehicle.
• 	Vehicle Seats
Since the risk zone for driver airbags is the first 2-3 inches of inflation, placing yourself 10 inches
from your driver airbag provides you with a clear margin of safety. This distance is measured
from the center of the steering wheel to your breastbone.
• 	Vehicle Mirrors
Good visual search habits require proper positioning and the use of mirrors located inside and
outside a vehicle. Mirrors should be properly adjusted to detect objects and not for determining
the position of other vehicles. Adjust your rearview and side mirrors before you start driving.
Inside mirror
 	Adjust the inside mirror so you can see the entire rear window from the driver's seat. You
should have to move only your eyes, not your head when using this mirror.
 	Drivers 6 feet tall or taller may find it helpful to reposition the mirror upside down, if
possible. This usually raises the bottom edge of the mirror about 1 to 2 inches and can
substantially reduce a major blind area to the front for tall drivers.
Side-view mirrors
 	To adjust the driver's side-view mirror, place your head against the left side window and
set the mirror so you can just barely see the side of the car on the mirror's right side.
 	To adjust the passenger's side-view mirror, position your head so that it is just above the
center console. Set the mirror so you can just barely see the side of the car on the left side
of the mirror.
Before you drive, take time to assess your trip –
especially if driving in hazardous weather. If
traveling Arkansas roadways, visit
https://idrivearkansas.com or call or text the
Arkansas Department of Transportation at (501)
569-2374 for travel information on weather-

-- 94 of 98 --

83
Do not hang items from your mirror or clutter up the view through the windshield with decals. These
items could block a portion of your view.
Any missing or damaged mirror(s), which obstruct your view, should be replaced. Drivers should
remember objects may appear closer than the view in the mirror and mirrors do not display objects in
blind spots. To properly check your blind spots, one should glance over the shoulder in the direction in
which the vehicle is moving.
• 	Braking System
Only manufactured brakes can properly stop a vehicle. Your brakes should be in good working
condition. If you suspect brake problems, you should take your vehicle to a licensed mechanic for
an inspection. There are certain indicators to help alert you of a potential brake issue.
1) A noise from underneath the vehicle when the brake pedal is depressed.
2) Foul smell during heavy braking.
3) Depressing the brake pedal with little or any breaking action.
• 	Lights
Inspect turn signals, brake lights, taillights, and headlights for good operating conditions. To
check your vehicle lights, turn them on from inside your vehicle, step outside the vehicle and look
for any non-working lights. When inspecting your brake lights, you will need a partner to depress
the brake while you inspect the rear of your vehicle for red lights on each side.
• 	Windshield and Wipers
The windshield of your car ensures your safety while driving, you should always keep your
windshield clean, but it is also prone to chips and cracks. Damaged glass can break more easily in
a minor collision or when an object hits the windshield. You should replace or repair damaged
windshields as soon as possible. Wiper blades should be replaced every six (6) months to a year
or as soon as you notice a difference in driving visibility.
Use the guide below to help determine if your windshield is safe.
Rule: Inspect for and Reject if:
• 	Glass in the windshield, side, or rear window areas is damaged to the extent that the driver’s
view to the front left, right or rear of the vehicle is obscured.
• 	Not equipped with safety glass in all doors, windows, and windshields after July 1, 1951.
• 	More than one crack or other visual impairment is present in an eight (8) inch-wide area
running horizontally through the center of the windshield that falls under the wiper area on
the driver’s side. (See Diagram).

-- 95 of 98 --

84
• 	Tires
Tire safety depends on maintaining proper tire pressure, observing tire and vehicle load limits
(not carrying more weight in your vehicle than your tires or vehicle can safely handle), avoiding
road hazards, and inspecting tires for cuts, slashes, and other irregularities.
The recommended tire inflation pressure that vehicle manufacturers provide reflects the proper
psi when a tire is cold. The term cold does not relate to the outside temperature. Rather, a cold tire
is one that has not been driven on for at least three hours. When you drive, your tires get warmer,
causing the air pressure within them to increase. Therefore, to get an accurate tire pressure
reading, you must measure tire pressure when the tires are cold or compensate for the extra
pressure in warm tires.
The tire tread provides gripping action and traction that prevent your vehicle from slipping or
sliding, especially when the road is wet or icy. In general, tires are not safe and should be
replaced when the tread is worn down to 1/16 of an inch. A method for checking tread depth is to
place a penny in the tread with Lincoln's head upside down and facing you. If you can see the top
of Lincoln's head, you are ready for new tires.
• 	Steering System
If the steering system is not working properly, it may be difficult to control the direction of the
vehicle. Any steering system that does not move when the steering wheel is first turned may need
to be checked by a mechanic.
• 	Exhaust System
The exhaust system removes toxic gases from the engine and aids in the reduction of noise from
the engine and helps cool the hot gases from the running engine. Fumes from a leaky exhaust can
cause death in a very short time.
Never allow the engine to idle in your garage or enclosed area without an open window. During
the winter it is a good idea to occasionally open a window and allow fresh air to fill the cabin of
the vehicle, which will reduce any risk of toxic exhaust fumes filtering into the moving vehicle.
• 	Engine
Starting the Engine- Be familiar with your vehicle. Use the Owner’s Manual to become familiar
with basic operations. Always make sure your parking brake is set before starting the engine.
Always follow the prescribed procedures for routine maintenance found in the vehicle
owner/operator handbook.
• 	Horn
The horn is an important safety device that warns other drivers and could save your life. Your
horn should always be in working condition.

-- 96 of 98 --

85
The final stage of obtaining a driver’s license in Arkansas is to successfully complete a skills test.
You will provide your own vehicle for this test. The applicant will be tested on his/her ability to locate
vehicle controls and demonstrate their ability to safely operate a motor vehicle on the streets and
highways. Motorcycles and motor-driven cycles will follow the same guideline.
Preparing for the Skills Exam
When you appear for testing, please bring your instruction permit, a valid licensed driver (not suspended
or revoked) twenty-one (21) or older, current insurance (paper or electronic), and vehicle registration.
Vehicle Inspection
Applicants must be familiar with the location of vehicle controls (refer to the skills exam form) and must
demonstrate their location. Examiners will also inspect the vehicle for mechanical defects. Make sure
your vehicle doesn’t require maintenance and that no vehicle warning lights are displayed.
A skills test will not be given if:
• The vehicle interior is excessively dirty.
• All lights do not work.
• The windshield should be clean and free from any crack that obstructs the view.
• The windshield should be clean
• The muffler and exhaust system are not operating properly.
• The horn does not work.
• The speedometer does not work.
• The tires are worn so badly as to be unsafe. No donut spares are allowed on the vehicle.
• The windows are excessively tinted.
• The examiner recognizes serious mechanical defects, such as defective brakes.
• The vehicle is not properly licensed, and the license must be properly displayed.
• The applicant is unfamiliar with the vehicle control mechanisms
Performance Guidelines:
The skills test will measure an applicant’s ability to operate the vehicle properly and legally.
• 	Vehicle Controls: Refer to the skills test form for a list of required vehicle controls.
o 	Grading: The applicant will be asked to identify each control. If the applicant cannot
locate the control, the examiner will mark the missed control as an infraction. You are
allowed three (3) missed controls before the test is failed.
• 	Road Test: Applicants are graded on how well they know the rules of the road.
o 	A total of two missed attempts in the same category will constitute a failed exam. For
example, the examiner warns you on the first rolling stop, if you acquire another rolling
stop, it’s a two-week penalty.
o 	Automatic failures are imposed a thirty-day penalty.
A violation of any law may result in a failing grade on the skills test.
Skill guidelines have been promulgated and approved by the legislature.

-- 97 of 98 --

86
Arkansas State Police Driver’s Testing
1-2-3 Skills Checklist
Revised: June 24, 2025
Before a skills exam can begin, all applicants must have the following:
1. 	Original Driver’s License Permit
• Do Not Photocopy or Laminate the Permit.
2. 	Valid Licensed Driver
• Must present a hard copy license to the examiner.
• License must be valid and not expired, suspended, or revoked.
• Licensed driver must be twenty-one (21) years or older if the applicant is driving.
• An unrestricted driver with a valid Class D, (16) years and older, may drive the applicant to
the test center.
3. 	Current Proof of Insurance and Current Vehicle Registration
• Proof of Insurance can be a paper or electronic card.
• Valid vehicle registration.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION:
• 	Schedule an appointment for the driving portion. Visit: https://telegov.egov.com/aspdlskills
• 	The permit is valid for two (2) years and cannot be renewed.
• 	The skills exam must be completed, and a license purchased before the two (2) year
expiration. Failure to complete the requirements will result in the applicant retaking all
phases of the driver’s exam.
• 	Permits cannot be extended for any reason, due to inclement weather. No Exceptions!
• 	The permit allows the applicant to drive with a licensed driver, twenty-one (21) years or
older, to practice driving.
• 	If you have Immigration documents, please bring all documents with you each time.
• 	Vehicles must be clean and in good mechanical condition.
• 	Window tint darker than 25% on the front and darker than 10% in the back will be denied.
• 	Any brow measuring more than 5 inches from the center of the windshield will be denied.
• 	No window tint on the front windshield is permitted.
• 	No cameras or recording devices are allowed.
• 	A road test is not canceled due to rain. However, we do not administer the test in severe
thunderstorms, fog, sleet, or snow.
• 	If you wear contacts or glasses, please bring them with you on the day of your test.
• 	Refer to page 76 in this manual for more detailed information.

-- 98 of 98 --