July 2025

-- 1 of 151 --

Earning your driver’s license is an exciting milestone—one that represents freedom,
independence, and personal responsibility Whether you’re driving to school, work,
or exploring all that Delaware has to offer—from the best beaches in the nation to
our scenic state parks to sales tax-free shopping—getting behind the wheel is both
a major step in your life and a gateway to new opportunities
But safe driving isn’t just about passing a test—it’s about staying focused, avoiding
distractions, following speed limits, and never driving under the infl uence. Every
choice you make behind the wheel affects not just you, but everyone around you
Obeying traffi c laws, wearing your seatbelt, and respecting other drivers can save
lives
Delaware’s roadways make it easy to travel across the state, but driving responsibly
also means thinking about your impact Consider carpooling, conserving trips,
or using public transit to help protect our environment and ensure a greener
Delaware for future generations
This guide is your roadmap to becoming a safe, confi dent driver. Study it, take it
seriously, and remember—driving is a privilege, not a right The best drivers aren’t
just skilled behind the wheel; they understand that respecting the road is just as
important as navigating it
–– Governor Matt Meyer

-- 2 of 151 --

MESSAGE FOR DELAWARE DRIVERS
The Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles has prepared this manual to assist
both new and current motorists to better prepare for challenges that may be
encountered while navigating Delaware’s roadways
Possession of a Delaware drivers permit or license is a privilege that comes with
great responsibility 	To ensure your safety, that of your passengers, and those
around you, we encourage you to familiarize yourself with the rules and regulations
contained in this manual
Second only to our commitment to your safety, our mission is to ensure you receive
a “First Class” customer experience that includes speed and effi ciency provided
by our highly trained professional staff for all of your driving-related needs
We encourage all motorists to share the roadways in a careful, courteous, sober,
and defensive manner and to remember to always fasten your seat belts On behalf
of the state of Delaware, we wish you many years of safe driving
Corrections, suggestions, or recommendations to this manual may be addressed to:
Chief of Driver Services
Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles
P O Box 698
Dover, DE 19903
Shante Hastings
Secretary
Department of Transportation
Amy Anthony
Director
Division of Motor Vehicles

-- 3 of 151 --

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION ONE – INTRODUCTION 	Page
Definitions 	11
On-line Services 	13
MOTOR VEHICLE FEES 	14
SECTION TWO – DRIVER LICENSE INFORMATION
NEW FEDERAL IDENTIFICATION STANDARDS 	16
What Documentation Do I Need To Get My Compliant Driver License 	16
DRIVER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 	17
Exemptions From Holding A Delaware Driver License 	17
Who May Not Be Licensed 	17
APPLYING FOR A LICENSE 	18
How Do I Get A License 	18
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DRIVER
LICENSE AND ID CARD APPLICANTS 	18
Ineligible Immigration Status 	18
Determine Legal Status/Authorized Length of Stay 	19
Acceptable Identification Documents List 	20
Foreign Adoption Requirements for Minors 	23
Driving Privilege Card Requirements 	23
How Do I Get A Driving Privilege Card? 	24
Graduated Driver License 	26
Requirements For First Time Applicants Over Age 18 	29
Transfer Of Licenses From Other Jurisdictions Into Delaware (over 18) 	29
Transfer Of Licenses From Other Jurisdictions Into Delaware (under 18) 	30
License Renewal 	31
Permanent License Renewal 	31
Exchange Student Licensing Procedures 	31
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 	31
Restricted License 	31
Replacement License 	32
Name Change 	32
Address Change 	32
Identification (ID) Card 	32
Veteran indicator on Driver License/Identification Card 	32
Voter Registration 	33
Medical Indicator 	34
Megan’s Law/Sex Offenders 	34
Mandatory Disclosure Of Social Security Numbers 	34

-- 4 of 151 --

Selective Service System Registration 	34
Next Of Kin Registry 	34
Organ And Tissue Donor Program 	34
Good Samaritan's Law 	35
TAT- Human Trafficking 	35
DRIVER LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS 	36
Class D Operator’s License 	36
Commercial Driver Licenses (CDL) 	36
Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP) 	37
CDL Class A License 	37
CDL Class B License 	37
CDL Class C License 	37
NON - CDL Class A License 	37
NON - CDL Class B License 	37
Class D & DPC Learner Permit 	37
Graduated Driver License Permit 	37
Temporary License 	37
Conditional, Occupational, And Hardship Licenses 	38
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Endorsement/License 	38
ENDORSEMENTS 	38
Motorcycle Endorsement 	38
Motorcycle Rider Classes 	38
Motorcycle Learner Permit 	38
School Bus Endorsement 	39
Taxi/Limo Endorsement 	39
THE DRIVER EXAMINATION 	39
Vision Screening 	39
Highway Sign And Signal Test 	40
Rules Of The Road Test 	40
Road Test 	40
Road Test Locations 	41
Motor Vehicle To Be Driven During Road Test 	41
When You Must Be Accompanied By A Licensed Driver 	42
Preparation For The Driver Examination 	42
MEDICAL INFORMATION AND REPORTING 	42
Self-Reporting Of Medical Conditions 	42
Special Examinations 	42
Mandatory Medical Reporting 	43
Medical Surrender 	43
LICENSE REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 	43
Mandatory Revocations 	43

-- 5 of 151 --

Habitual Offender Revocation 	44
Suspension Of A Driver License 	44
Child Support Delinquency 	45
DRIVER IMPROVEMENT PROBLEM DRIVER PROGRAM 	45
Delaware Point System 	46
Driver Improvement Problem Driver Program Actions 	46
Point Credit 	47
Serious Speeding Violations 	47
Occupational License 	47
Driving During Suspension Or Revocation 	48
Aggressive Driving 	48
Approved Behavioral Modification/Attitudinal-Driving Courses 	48
Defensive Driving Courses 	48
IMPAIRED DRIVING 	48
Drinking And Driving 	48
Drinking And Blood Alcohol Concentration 	49
Crash Risk 	50
If You Drink, When Can You Drive 	50
Drugs Combined With Alcohol 	51
Distracted Driving 	51
Drowsy Driving 	52
DELAWARE DRINKING AND DRIVING LAWS 	53
Drinking While Driving Prohibited 	53
Driving Under The Influence (DUI) 	53
Implied Consent Law 	53
Law Pertaining To Juveniles Driving While Under The Influence 	53
Zero Tolerance Law 	53
Underage Consumption Or Possession 	53
Delaware Specific Penalties And Procedures 	54
Driving Under The Influence (DUI) Penalties For A First Offense 	55
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Program for First Offense Election (FOE) 	55
DUI Penalties For Second Offense 	56
DUI Penalties For Third Offense 	56
DUI Penalties For Fourth Offense 	56
DUI Penalties For Fifth Offense 	56
DUI Penalties For Sixth Offense 	57
DUI Penalties For Seventh Offense 	57
Ignition Interlock Device Program (IID) 	57

-- 6 of 151 --

SECTION THREE – VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, TITLES,
REGISTRATION, AND INSURANCE
MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 	59
Required Equipment 	59
Additional Equipment 	60
Prohibited Equipment 	60
Using Headlights 	61
Using Safety Belts And Child Restraints 	61
HOW TO TITLE/REGISTER YOUR VEHICLE 	62
Step 1 – Liability Insurance, Financial Responsibility And Penalty 	62
Step 2 – Vehicle Inspection 	63
Step 3 – Title 	64
Requirement For Applicants Under 18 Years Of Age 	65
Renewing Registration 	65
Change Of Address 	66
Change Of Name 	66
Out-Of-State Inspections 	66
Responsibility Of Owner 	66
SECTION FOUR – RULES OF THE ROAD
Right-Of-Way 	67
Signals And Signs 	67
Red Light Reinforcement Program 	67
Understanding Traffic Signals 	67
Arrows 	69
Pedestrian Signals 	70
Accessible Pedestrian Signals (APS) 	71
High Intensity Activated Crosswalk (HAWK) 	71
Rectangular Rapid Flashing Beacon 	71
Bicycle Signals 	72
Highway Signs 	72
Guide Signs 	76
Information Signs 	76
Beacons Supplementing Signs 	76
WORK ZONES 	76
When Approaching Or Driving Through A Work Zone 	77
Regulatory Signs 	77
Warning Signs 	78
Guiding Or Channelizing Devices 	78
Flashing Arrow Panels 	78
Flaggers 	78

-- 7 of 151 --

SOME IMPORTANT DELAWARE LAWS 	79
Cell Phone/Hand-Held Electronic Device Use While Driving 	79
Signaling 	79
Overtaking (Passing) Other Vehicles 	79
Move Over Laws 	80
TRAFFIC CONTROL LAWS 	81
General Laws 	81
Emergency Notification System (ENS) 	81
Highway-Rail Intersection Signs And Signals 	81
Pavement Markings 	82
Reversible Lanes 	83
Reserved Lanes 	83
Roundabouts 	83
How to use a Diverging Diamond Intersection (DDI) 	84
Shared Center Lane 	85
General Rules 	85
Right-Of-Way 	86
Stopping For School Buses 	87
PARKING 	89
General Parking Rules 	89
Stopping And Parking Violations 	90
SPEED 	91
General Speed Restriction 	91
Speed Limits 	91
Minimum Speed 	92
Speed Signs 	92
OTHER HIGHWAY USERS 	92
Pedestrians 	92
Bicycles 	94
Sharing The Road With Motorcycles 	97
Motorcycle Operation And License Endorsements 	99
Mopeds And Tripeds 	99
Off Highway Vehicles 	99
Animal Riders And Animal Drivers 	100
Farm Tractors And Equipment, Road Machinery, and Construction Equipment 	100
Who Must Not Use The Highway 	100
Slow-Moving Vehicles 	100
Sharing The Road With A Truck 	100
Backing Crashes 	102
Reporting a Commercial Safety Violation 	102

-- 8 of 151 --

SECTION FIVE – DRIVING SKILLS AND SAFETY TIPS
BEFORE YOU DRIVE 	103
Trip Planning 	103
Check The Vehicle 	103
Secure Your Load 	105
Clean Glass Surfaces 	105
Adjust Seat And Mirrors 	106
Use Safety Belts 	106
Use Child Restraints 	107
Proper Restraint Of Child 	107
Bad Information 	109
An individual’s constitutional and other legal rights during a traffic stop 	109
Laws regarding questioning and detention by a law-enforcement
officer, proof of identity and consequences for failure to comply 	110
The role and procedures of a law-enforcement officer
in general and during a traffic stop 	110
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law Enforcement 	110
How and where to file a compliment on behalf of
or a complaint against a law-enforcement officer 	111
BASIC DRIVING 	111
Starting 	111
Accelerating 	111
Steering 	111
Speeding 	112
Stopping 	112
Braking 	113
Seeing Well 	113
Scanning 	114
Using Your Lights 	117
COMMUNICATING 	118
Let Others Know You Are There 	118
Let Others Know What You Are Doing 	120
ADJUSTING SPEED 	121
Adjusting To Road Conditions 	121
Adjusting To Traffic 	122
NIGHT DRIVING 	123
DRIVE DEFENSIVELY 	124
HOW WELL CAN YOU SEE? 	124
Darkness 	124
Rain, Fog, Or Snow 	124
Hills And Curves 	124
Parked Vehicles 	125
Sight Distance Rule 	125
Speed Limits 	125

-- 9 of 151 --

SHARING SPACE 	125
Space Ahead 	125
Space Behind 	127
Space To The Side 	127
Space To Merge 	128
Space To Cross or Enter 	128
Space To Pass 	129
Space For Special Situations 	130
BE IN SHAPE TO DRIVE 	131
Vision 	131
Hearing 	132
Fatigue 	132
Drinking And Driving 	132
Health 	133
Emotions 	133
VEHICLE EMERGENCIES 	134
Steering Wheel Locking Device 	134
Brake Failure 	134
Running Off The Pavement 	134
Tire Blowout 	135
Power Failure 	135
Headlight Failure 	135
Gas Pedal Sticks 	135
Fire 	136
Stalling On Railroad Tracks 	136
AVOIDING COLLISIONS 	136
Stopping Quickly 	136
Turning Quickly 	136
Speeding Up 	137
Dealing With Skids 	137
PROTECT YOURSELF IN COLLISIONS 	137
Hit From The Rear 	138
Hit From The Side 	138
Hit From The Front 	138
CRASHES 	138
At The Crash Scene 	138
If Someone Is Injured 	139
Reporting Crashes 	139
Report an Issue 	140
Notes 	140
Crash Reporting Form 	143
INDEX 	145
DMV WEB PAGE 	WWW.DMV.DE.GOV
TEEN DRIVER WEB PAGE 	WWW.TEENDRIVING.DMV.DE.GOV
SENIOR DRIVER WEB PAGE 	WWW.SENIORDRIVER.DMV.DE.GOV

-- 10 of 151 --

11
SECTION ONE
SECTION ONE
INTRODUCTION
This manual gives you information on safe driving rules and practices to help you become
a safe driver Be sure to read the manual carefully Unless you know the information in
this manual, you cannot pass our knowledge exams This manual attempts to cover the
major elements of Delaware law; however, it cannot cover all parts of federal or State
law. If a conflict exists, then the actual code or legislation will always take precedence.
This manual will provide information needed to drive a passenger vehicle. If
you want a license to drive a commercial motor vehicle, you should read the
Commercial Driver Manual. If you want an endorsement to drive a motorcycle, you
should read the Motorcycle Operator Manual
If you have a disability and need a special accommodation in order to take an
exam, please call and make an appointment prior to coming to a DMV site: for
Delaware City call 302-326-5000; for Wilmington call 302-434-3200; for Dover
call 302-744-2500; and for Georgetown call 302-853-1000. Audio tests (with
headphones) are available upon request.
Definitions
“Bicycle” includes certain class of vehicles which are exclusively human-powered by
means of foot pedals The term bicycle also includes a two- or three-wheeled vehicle
with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts (1 hp), whose
maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such motor while
ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 mph
“Bike Box” means a designated area at the head of a traffic lane at intersections that
provides bicyclists with a safe way to turn and a visible way to get ahead of traffic.
“Blue Certificate” means the Driver Education Certificate.
“Convicted” means having been found guilty in a court of law of a violation of the
motor vehicle laws, forfeiture of bail bond, or a plea of guilty
“Commercial Driver License (CDL)” means the class of license drivers require in
order to drive a Commercial Motor Vehicle.
“Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP)” means a permit which authorizes the holder
to operate a specific class or endorsement of a commercial motor vehicle and is
accompanied by a commercial license holder within that same class
“Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV)” means, for purposes of Delaware licensing, a motor
vehicle weighing, rated, or registered over 26,000 pounds; a vehicle designed to carry 16
or more occupants (including the driver); or a vehicle required to be placarded for carrying
Hazardous Material. Definitions and requirements for commercial vehicles in interstate
commerce may differ and are covered in Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.
"Commercial Vehicle" means a vehicle classified as a pickup truck/cargo van/passenger
van/bus (over 5,000 pounds).
“Department” means the Department of Transportation acting directly or through
its duly authorized officers and agents.
“Divided Highway” means any highway divided into two or more roadways by
an intervening space, physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so
constructed as to impede vehicular traffic.
“Division” means the Division of Motor Vehicles.

-- 11 of 151 --

12
“DPC” means Driving Privilege Card which is a valid driver license that is issued
for driving purposes only and is not to be used as a valid form of identification.
“Driver” includes anyone who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
“Driver Education Certificate” means the certificate presented to students who
successfully complete a Delaware Department of Education approved Driver
Education course. The certificate must meet all Department of Education criteria
to be valid. Commonly referred to as the “Blue Certificate or “White Certificate”.
“Express Highway” means a State or Interstate highway especially designed for
through traffic.
“GDL” means Graduated Driver License which is a restricted permit issued to any
person who is at least age 16 or under age 18 or who is under age 22 receiving
special education services under an active Individualized Education Program (IEP)
and has completed an approved driver education course
“Highway” means the entire width between boundary lines of every road open to public
vehicular traffic, but does not include roads owned by private individuals or by institutions.
“Highway-Rail Intersection” means the area common to one or more highways
intersecting with, or crossing, one or more railroad tracks You may also be familiar
with highway-rail intersections being referred to as highway-rail grade crossings,
grade crossings, or railroad crossings
“Identification Card (ID)” means any type of identification card that can be used
as a valid form of identification.
“IEP” means Individualized Education Program which is a program for individuals
who are eligible for specialized education
“Intersection” means the area common to two or more highways that meet,
whether or not one highway crosses another
“License (DL)” means any type of license under which the holder has the privilege
of driving a motor vehicle
“Minibike” means any motor-driven cycle which has a wheel rim size less than 10
inches, or is less than 40 inches long from hub to hub, or has an engine of less than 45
cubic centimeter displacement, or has a seat less than 25 inches above the ground
“Moped” shall mean a pedal or nonpedal bicycle having 2 tandem wheels, either
of which is 10 inches or more in maximum diameter, and having an internal
combustion motor characterized in that the maximum piston displacement is less
than 55 cc, or an electric motor rated between 751 watts and 2,000 watts
“Motorcycle” includes any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels,
except tractors, minibikes, and electric personal assistive mobility devices (EPAMD).
“Motor Vehicle” includes any self-propelled vehicle designed to operate on a
roadway, except farm tractors and OHVs.
“Must” means an action or practice required by law.
“NDR” means National Driver Register (NDR), which is a computerized database of
information about drivers who have had their licenses suspended or revoked, or who
have been convicted of serious traffic violations. Motor vehicle agencies use NDR to
avoid issuing licenses to problem drivers. You may call NDR at 202-366-4800.
“OHV” means Off-Highway Vehicle, a motor-driven vehicle capable of cross-
country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or over land, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland, or other natural terrain

-- 12 of 151 --

13
SECTION ONE
“Owner” means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or a person who is
purchasing a vehicle on time and has immediate right of possession
“Railroad Crossing” means “Highway-Rail Intersection” as defined above.
“Registration” means the registration certificate (card) and the registration plate (tag).
“Road” as used herein has the same meaning as highway
“Roadway” means that portion of the highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic, excluding the shoulder.
“Safety Zone” means an area officially set aside within a highway for exclusive use
of pedestrians and so marked
“SAVE” means Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements Program; verifies
the authenticity of USCIS documentation.
“School Bus” means every motor vehicle painted with national school bus chrome
yellow, and which has the words “SCHOOL BUS” displayed on the vehicle.
“Secretary” means the Secretary of the Department of Transportation of this State.
“Should” means a recommended action or practice not required by law.
“Street” as used herein, means a highway in a city or a suburban district
“Three-point turn” is a maneuver to turn a vehicle 180 degrees on a narrow street
It is accomplished by turning sharply to the left almost to curb, backing to right
almost to the other curb, and finally turning to the right side of the roadway in the
direction opposite to that at start (sometimes called “turnabout”).
“Trailer” means any vehicle without motor power designed to carry property or
passengers and to be drawn by a motor vehicle
“Triped” shall mean a pedal or nonpedal cycle having 3 wheels, either of which is
10 inches or more in maximum diameter, and having an internal combustion motor
characterized in that the maximum piston displacement is less than 55 cc, or an
electric motor rated between 751 watts and 2,000 watts
“Two-Way Cycle Track” means physically separated cycle tracks that allow
bicycle movement in both directions on one side of the road. Also known as
protected bike lanes, separated bikeways and on-street bike paths
“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; and except electric
trackless trolley coaches, electric personal assistive mobility devices, and OHVs.
On-line Services
The DMV provides a variety of information and on-line services on our website at
dmv.de.gov, such as issues relating to driver services, vehicle services, and
transportation services You can access our forms, manuals, and fee schedules for
easy downloading or printing We have a teen driver website, www.teendriving.dmv.
de.gov, and senior driver website, www.seniordriver.dmv.de.gov Online services
include vehicle registration renewal notifications, vehicle registration renewal, driver
license/ID card renewal, schedule your road exam, check the status of your license,
administrative hearing requests, purchase of driving records, DMV fee calculator,
organ donor requests, next of kin notification system, vanity tag, request a duplicate/
change of address on a driver license/ID, pay for your uninsured motorist fine and
handicap placard issuance or renewals
Please visit our website for additional services at mydmv.delaware.gov

-- 13 of 151 --

14
MOTOR VEHICLE FEES
Registration 	Fees
CARS
Renewals (yearly) 	40.00
Late Renewals 	20.00
Temporary Tag 	20 00
Temporary Permit 	20 00
Courtesy Inspection 	4.00
Vanity Plate (yearly) 	40.00
Handicap Placard 	No Charge
Motorcycle 	15 00
Environmental Specialty
Plate (one-time) 	50.00
Animal Welfare
Plate (one-time) 	50.00
Farmland Preservation
Plate (one-time) 	50.00
FARM TRUCKS (YEARLY)
5,000 pounds or less 	40 00
Greater than 5,000 pounds 	*3 80
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
(YEARLY)
5,000 pounds or less 	40 00
Greater than 5,000 pounds 	*6 40
TRAILERS (YEARLY)
0 - 1,000 pounds 	15 00
1,001 - 2,000 pounds 	20 00
2,001 - 5,000 pounds 	40 00
Greater than 5,000 pounds 	*18 00
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES (YEARLY)
5,000 pounds or less 	40 00
Greater than 5,000 pounds 	*18 00
For More Information
Please Contact the
DMV Website at
dmv.de.gov
Uninsured Motorist 	Fees
Penalty 	**100 00
Vehicle Registration
Reinstatement 	50.00
Driver License
Class D 	8yr 40 00
Renewal Class D 	8yr 40.00
Renewal Permanent*** 	8yr 	24.00
DPC 	4yr 	20 00
CDL Licenses 	8yr 	48.00
CDL/with HazMat endorsement 5yr 30 00
CDL/each additional endorsement 5 00
Non-CDL Class A/B 	8yr 40.00
Motorcycle Endorsement 8yr 	12 00
Taxi Endorsement 	3 45
Late Renewal Fee 	10 00
Replacement Driver License 	20 00
Medical Indicator 	No Charge
Change of Address 	No Charge
Veteran Indicator**** 	10.00
Change of Name 	1.15
Photo Identification Card 	40.00
Replacement Photo ID Card 	5.00
Driver License Record 	25 00
Certified DL Record Affidavit 	30 00
CDL/Disqualification
Reinstatement 	50.00
DL Suspension Reinstatement 50 00
DL Revocation Reinstatement 200 00
Driver’s License fees also include the cost of
learner’s permits (Motorcycle, Class D, and
CDL), that proceed the issuance of the licenses.
* Price for each 1,000 pounds over 5,000
** Plus $5.00 Per Day After 31st Day From
Mailing Date of Notice
*** Effective August 1, 2007, the division will
no longer issue new permanent driver
license documents
****Veteran Indicator may be added to driver
license or identification card free of charge
during renewal or duplicate transactions
Otherwise, there is a $10 00 fee

-- 14 of 151 --

15
SECTION ONE
Notes
• DMV accepts cash, check, money order and credit card payments
from Visa, American Express, Discover, MasterCard, Google Pay and
Apple pay with proper identification.
• If you present an uncollectible check, a penalty fee of $25.00
is charged. If the original amount plus the penalty fee is not paid
within 10 days, your driver’s license and/or registration will be
suspended
• The DMV will not charge late fees for active duty military members,
or their dependents, when renewing or processing beyond an
expiration date if they can provide proof that they were deployed or
stationed outside of the State of Delaware at the time of expiration.
Military identification along with military assignment orders will
provide this proof
• Delaware law allows a vehicle owner who trades in a Delaware-titled
vehicle, when purchasing another vehicle, to deduct the value of the
trade-in vehicle from the purchase price of the new vehicle Certain
limitations apply to this credit. Refer to Forms and Manuals Section
MV347 Document Fee Credit, on the Division of Motor Vehicles website at
dmv.de.gov
• Delaware law allows a vehicle owner a credit on a sales tax, transfer
tax, or some similar levy paid to another state on the purchase of a
vehicle within 90 days prior to registering the vehicle in Delaware The
90-day rule is strictly enforced
• Delaware law allows the Division to charge a reasonable fee not
to exceed $25 00 to any person presenting a payment that is
returned as uncollectible (i.e., bounced check or bad credit card).
The Division will send notification by certified mail to the last known
address of the individual presenting the uncollectible payment
and allow 10 days to furnish payment. If payment is not received
within 10 days following the date of mailing of such certified mail,
the Division shall forthwith suspend the individual’s driver license or
vehicle registration until payment has been paid in full
Duplicates 	Fees
License Plate with Sticker 	10 00
License Plate without Sticker 	5.00
Validation Sticker 	5 00
Dealer License Plate 	10.00
Registration Card 	10.00
Sample License Plate 	6.00
Environmental/Animal
Welfare License Plate 	10.00
Farmland Preservation Plate 	10.00
Titles 	Fees
Title (with Lien) 	55.00
Title (without Lien) 	35.00
Title (Duplicate) 	50.00
Vehicle Record 	25.00
Certified Vehicle Affidavit 	30.00
Retain Tag Feea 	20 00
Change Tag Service Feea 	15 00
Document Fee (Minimum)b 	8 00
a - Excludes Title Fee
b - Calculated as 4.25% of the purchase price or NADA book value, whichever is greater. Mobile
homes document fee will be 3.75% of the purchase price or NADA book value, whichever
is greater

-- 15 of 151 --

16
SECTION TWO
DRIVER LICENSE INFORMATION
In 2010, The Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV) began issuing secure
driver licenses and identification cards to meet Federal Identification standards.
The Federal identification standards affected what was needed to apply for or
renew your driver license or identification card. Please take a moment to read
about the application process and find out what documents you will need to
COLLECT and BRING with you so you can SECURE your new driver license or
identification card.
FEDERAL IDENTIFICATION STANDARDS
The 9-11 Commission, which was formed following terrorist attacks on the United
States in 2001, issued several recommendations and requirements that were aimed
at improving our nation’s security. One powerful and challenging requirement
was the development of federal identification standards for states to follow
when issuing driver licenses and identification (DL/ID) cards. These identification
standards are intended to combat terrorism, identity theft, and other crimes by
strengthening the integrity and security of state-issued identification documents.
• Certain information and security features must be incorporated into
each card
• Source documentation must be provided for proof of identity, lawful
status in the U.S., date of birth, social security number, and primary
residence address (compliant DL/ID acceptable documentation list).
• Source documentation provided by an applicant must be verified.
• Security and privacy of personal information collected when applying
for a driver license or identification card must remain a top priority.
What Documentation Do I Need To Get My Compliant Driver License?
Delaware residents who wish to obtain a compliant driver license must have their
source documents validated. For existing DL/ID holders, you will be presenting
original source documents at the time of renewal, like you did the first time you
obtained your DL/ID. This is a one-time revalidation. The only time the DMV
will need to see your source documents again is if you decide to change any of
the information on your DL/ID, such as a name change, or if your immigration
documents expire. All new applicants will already be required to show this
documentation; so, for them, it will be business as usual Please refer to page 21 for
a complete list of acceptable source documentation
Some existing customers may not want, or be able, to provide these documents. For
folks in this situation, you may obtain a non-compliant DL/ID. A compliant DL/ID is
distinguishable by the gold star in the upper right-hand corner of the DL/ID and a
non-compliant card is distinguishable by the phrase “Not for Federal ID” printed in
the upper margin of the DL/ID.
A non-compliant license may be converted to compliant status at any time. To convert
your license visit any local DMV and provide the required documents for a compliant
license found on Page 21 There will be a $20 00 replacement license fee assessed

-- 16 of 151 --

17
17
SECTION TWO
Delaware made the decision to change our process to comply with federal
identification standards for your security and convenience. By complying with these
standards, in addition to driving authority and identification, you will be able to use
your DL/ID for domestic flights, entering federal facilities, and other official federal
purposes. Without obtaining a federally-compliant DL/ID, you will be required
to obtain a U.S. passport (or other acceptable document per the Department of
Homeland Security) to do these things; and obtaining a passport is going to be more
time consuming and expensive for you
DRIVER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
If you operate a motor vehicle on public roadways in Delaware you are required to
have a driver license, and you must carry it with you. You are required to obtain a
Delaware driver license within 60 days after becoming a bona fide Delaware resident.
Exemptions From Holding A Delaware Driver License
1. Individuals while driving or operating a road roller, road machinery,
or farm tractor or implement of husbandry temporarily on a highway
2. Non-resident operators, over the age of 16 years, currently licensed
in their home state or country The license must be in the driver’s
possession
3. Members of the Armed Forces of the United States who are serving
on active duty and any dependent of the member if they possess a
valid driver license from their state of domicile
Who May Not Be Licensed
The law does not permit the Division of Motor Vehicles to issue a driver license when:
1. You are less than the required age for a specific license or endorsement.
2 You are under the age of 18 and have not completed a Delaware
Department of Education approved course in driver education
3. You are under the age of 18 and cannot obtain the required signature
of consent on your application (usually parent, court-appointed
custodian, or guardian).
4 Your license or driving privileges are suspended or revoked in any
jurisdiction
5. You are not a bona fide resident of Delaware.
6 You do not understand road signs in English

-- 17 of 151 --

18
7. You are physically or mentally unable to drive safely. If you are
subject to loss of consciousness from diseases of the central nervous
system, you must furnish the division with a written certification by
your licensed practitioner that such person’s physical disability is
under sufficient control to permit you to drive a motor vehicle safely.
8 You are determined to be a habitual drunkard or to be addicted to
the use of narcotic drugs
9. You are unable to provide proof of legal presence in the United States
and do not meet the requirements for a DPC.
10 Your personal information differs from information from other
agencies (e.g., different dates of birth, different names, different
Social Security numbers, different U.S. entry dates, different
addresses, etc.).
APPLYING FOR A LICENSE
How Do I Get A License?
You must apply in person at the Division of Motor Vehicles (Division) in Delaware
City, Dover, Georgetown or Wilmington. Addresses of these offices are listed on
the outside back cover of this manual
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVER
LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION CARD
APPLICANTS
Ineligible Immigration Status
Those applicants who are legally in the United States under the following immigration
status or holding invalid or expired documents are not eligible for a Delaware-issued
driver license or identification card, even if they have established residency in this State
but may be eligible to apply for a Delaware Driving Privilege Card (DPC). If you fall
under any of the below immigration statuses, please see page 23
• Those with invalid or expired immigration or passport documents
• Those I-94 holders without a valid INS or USCIS stamp.
• Immigration status A-1. Ambassador, public minister, career diplomatic or
consular officer and dependents are ineligible, because an “A” status may
only be issued a driver’s license from the United States State Department.
• Immigration status A-2 for other foreign government officials or
employees and dependents unless they are foreign military officials and/
or their dependents. Foreign military members and their dependents must
provide a valid passport, I-94, visa, or assignment orders to be eligible.
• Immigration status B-1. Visitor for business.
• Immigration status B-2. Visitor for pleasure (tourist).
• Immigration status C-1. Alien in transit through the United States.
• Immigration status C-2. Alien in transit to United Nations Headquarters
district. Travel limited to 25 miles radius of Columbus Circle in New York.
• Immigration status C-3. Foreign government official coming to the
United Nations, dependents, attendants, servants, or other personal
employees of official in transit through United States.
• Immigration status D-1. Alien crew members.

-- 18 of 151 --

19
19
SECTION TWO
• Immigration status G-1. Resident representative of a foreign government
to an international organization, plus staff and dependents
• Immigration status WB. Visitor for business (visa waiver program).
• Immigration status WT. Visitor for pleasure (tourist in visa waiver
program).
• Border Crossing cards
The Division must verify all non-citizen applicants’ legal status and authorized
length of stay in the United States upon the initial issuance of a driver’s license
(including out-of-state license transfers) and upon license renewal therefore, non-
citizens must present their original immigration documents. United States citizens
should provide a U.S. certified birth certificate; valid, unexpired U.S. passport;
Consular Report of Birth Abroad; Certificate of Naturalization; or Certificate of
Citizenship
The expiration date on DL/ID must not exceed the period of time non-citizens
are authorized in the United States. This ensures that State-issued identification
documents are not valid should non-citizens overstay their authorized visit to this
country The Division will verify the source document to ensure it is genuine and
unaltered and confirm by electronic means that the immigration document is valid.
Non-citizens must provide USCIS or INS immigration documents containing either
an Alien Registration Number or I-94 Number which can be verified electronically
through the Department of Homeland Security’s Systematic Alien Verification for
Entitlements System (SAVE). The applicant’s legal status and authorized length of
stay will be primarily determined through SAVE. The following documents can be
used to determine legal status and authorized length of stay:
Determine Legal Status/Authorized Length of Stay
U.S. Citizenship – Expiration date – 8-year Driver License and ID card.
• Valid, unexpired U.S. passport
• Certified copy of a birth certificate filed with a State Office of Vital
Statistics or equivalent agency in the individual’s state of birth
• Consular Report of Birth Abroad (CRBA) issued by the U.S. Department
of State, Form FS-240, DS-1350, or FS-545
• Certificate of Naturalization issued by DHS, Form N-550 or Form N-570
• Certificate of Citizenship, Form N-560 or Form N-561, issued by DHS
Permanent Resident Immigrant – Expiration date – 8-year license ID card. The
Alien Registration Number is mandatory and verified electronically through SAVE.
If an applicant does not verify electronically, they will be referred to the USCIS to
resolve mismatch conditions
• Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551) issued by
DHS or INS
• Valid, unexpired foreign passport with visa stamped “processed for I-551”
Non-immigrant/Temporary – Expiration date limited by authorized stay in U.S.
which is verified electronically through SAVE. DMV cannot issue documents
without SAVE verification. If an applicant does not verify electronically, they will be
referred to the USCIS to resolve mismatch conditions. A one year expiration date
will be used when immigration records show “indefinite” or “duration of status”
for period of authorized stay. Form I-94 Number is mandatory except when Alien
Registration Number is available (refugee, asylee, parolee).

-- 19 of 151 --

20
• Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551) with
conditions (2 year limit) contains Alien Registration Number
(mandatory for SAVE verification).
• Non-immigrant visa, Arrival-Departure Record, Form I-94 with valid
unexpired passport and visa or I-94W for the Visa Waiver Program.
• Students. Foreign students having non-immigrant F-1/F-2 or M-1 visa
classification should have an I-20 Certificate of Eligibility for Non-
immigrant Student Status form along with their unexpired foreign
passport and I-94 card. J-1/J-2 visa holders must present a valid DS-
2019 or IAP-66.
• Refugee, asylee and parolee classifications must be accompanied
by additional documentation and I-94 displaying immigration status
and Alien Registration Number.
• Exception: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service (USCIS) offi ce
verify legal status and authorized length of stay
All drivers must sign a driver license application, surrender agreement and answer
the appropriate questions on those forms. Applicants who are licensed or have
an identification (ID) card in another state must surrender their license and/or ID
card from the other state(s). If eligible for a Social Security Number, proof must be
provided. (See Required Documents Table)
Each driver must pass an eye-screening examination. Some applicants may be referred
to their eye doctor or physician for additional medical exams if they have a medical or
mental condition that may interfere with their ability to operate a motor vehicle safely
Every driver license applicant is subject to a written and road skills exam
Acceptable Identification Documents List
Any person applying for a driver license (DL) or identifi cation (ID) card is required
to submit one primary document and one secondary document from the following
list. A primary document must contain the full name and date of birth and must
be verifi able (i.e., we must be able to contact the issuing agency to determine the
authenticity of the document). Each applicant must provide their social security
number, if eligible, two proofs of the applicant’s Delaware residency, and non-U. S.
Citizens must provide proof of legal presence in the United States.
Note: False statements, attempted fraud by displaying invalid licenses, ID cards
or documents, or misrepresentation is perjury and may result in fi nes and denial
of licenses and services. A driver license may be suspended any time false
information is found on the signed application form Please also refer to page 18
for information on who is exempt and/or who may not be licensed.

-- 20 of 151 --

21
21
SECTION TWO
Please provide ONE of the following proof of identity/legal presence documents:
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
This document must contain proof of full legal name, date of birth, and citizenship/
legal presence in the United States to be eligible to obtain a Federally Compliant
Identification Document. An applicant’s name must match on all documents.
• Certificate of birth (U.S. issued). Must be original or certified copy,
have a raised seal and be issued by the Bureau of Vital Statistics
or State Board of Health. Please note that wallet cards, birth
registration or hospital announcements/records are not accepted.
(If under 18, birth certificate must include birth parent(s) names.)
• Consular report of birth abroad
• Certificate of Naturalization (N-550, N-570, or N-578)
• Certificate of Citizenship (N-560, N-561, or N-645)
• Northern Marina Card (I-551)
• American Indian Card (I-551)
• U.S. Citizen Identification Card (I-179 or I-197)
• Valid passport, U.S. If foreign, appropriate INS document also is
required.
• Resident Alien Card (I-515, I-551, AR-3, or AR-103)
• Temporary Resident Identification Card (K-688)
• Non-Resident Alien Canadian Border Crossing Card (I-185 or I-586)
• Record of Arrival and Departure (in a valid Foreign Passport) (I-94
or I-94W visa waiver program)
• Record of Arrival and Departure w/attached photo stamped
“Temporary Proof of Lawful Permanent Resident” (I-94)
• Processed for I-551 stamp (in a valid Foreign Passport)
• Permanent Resident Re-Entry Permit (I-327)
• Refugee Travel Document (I-571)
• Employment Authorization Card (I-688A, I-688B, I-766)
• Canadian Immigration Record and Visa or Record of Landing (IMM
1000)
• 1 Federally Compliant State issued photo driver license
• 1 Federally Compliant State/Province/Territory issued photo ID card
Note: If applicant is under 18 or is eligible for the IEP GDL program, a document
containing parent(s) or legal guardian(s) name(s) must be presented (such as a
birth certificate or court document).

-- 21 of 151 --

22
Please provide ONE of the following proof of identity/legal presence documents
(continued): (Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
• 1 2 Court order Must contain full name, date of birth and court seal Examples
Include: adoption documents, name change document, gender document,
etc Does not include abstract of criminal or civil conviction
• 1 2 State issued photo driver license
• 1 2 State/Province/Territory issued photo ID card
• 1 2 Certified microfilm/copy of Driver’s License or ID Card
• 1 2 Official letter issued by vital statistics verifying full name and date of birth
• 1 2 Certified school records or transcripts verifying full name and date of birth
1 Must be accompanied by a U.S. Citizenship document or valid proof of legal
presence in the United States
2 Not acceptable documentation to be eligible for a Federally Compliant Identification
Document; however applicants may be eligible for a non-compliant identification
document.
Please provide ONE of the following for proof of a Social Security Number
(SSN): (Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
• Social Security Card
• W-2 tax form
• SSN 1099 form
• SSN Non-1099 form
• Pay stub containing full SSN
• Any valid document from Social Security Administration (SSA) containing
full SSA (Medicare/Medicaid cards not acceptable) • 1040 Tax form
• Ineligibility letter from SSA (only issued if not eligible based on legal
presence status)**
** Not acceptable documentation to be eligible for a federally compliant identification
document; however, applicants may be eligible for a non-compliant identification document
Please provide TWO of the following for proof of Delaware residency:
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
Note: Each of the two proofs of residency must be from separate sources and must
display a person’s physical address, not a “service to” address (i.e.; Post Office box) and
be postmarked within the last 60 days. Non-business letters/cards will NOT be accepted.
• Utility Bills
• Credit Card Statement
• Auto or Life Insurance policies
• Bank Account Records
• Employment Records
• Rental Agreement
• U.S. Postal Service change of address confirmation form/ postmarked
mail with forwarding address label
• Other non-personal mail postmarked within the last 60 days
* Mail must have been delivered by the USPS and be postmarked or received
within the last 60 days. (UPS/FedEx/DHL not accepted). Each of the two
proofs of residency must be from separate sources and must display the
person’s physical address, not a P.O. box*

-- 22 of 151 --

23
23
SECTION TWO
Please provide all of the following proof of legal name change:
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
Note: If you have had several name changes (such as multiple marriage/divorce) you will
need to provide all name change documents. You must change your name with the Social
Security Administration and wait 48 hours before appearing at DMV.
• Valid marriage license/civil union certificate which must be issued
by a government agency with a raised seal. Marriage certificates
signed by a clergy are not accepted
• Finalized court ordered name change document
• Finalized divorce decree stating your legal name. (A divorce decree
may be used as authority to resume using a previous name, only if it
contains the new name and the previous name and permits a return
to the previous name.)
Foreign Adoption Requirements for Minors
If a minor was adopted and born outside of the United States, additional
information will be required other than what is notated in the Acceptable
Identification Documents List on page 21. Proof of citizenship or legal presence
must be provided, even if the minor was adopted by a United States citizen. If the
minor’s name was changed during the adoption, proof of the name change and
adoption paperwork may be required, contingent upon the situation.
Example 1: If the minor provides their foreign birth certificate for proof of parents
in conjunction with proof of citizenship or legal presence, and the name(s) does
not match on all documents, proof of the legal name change WILL be required.
Acceptable proof would be the original adoption paperwork displaying the name
change or a legal name change document through court
Example 2: If the minor provides their foreign birth certificate for proof of parents
in conjunction with proof of citizenship or legal presence, and the name(s) does
match on all documents, proof of the legal name change WILL NOT be required.
Note: If the adoptive parents are NOT listed on the birth certificate, the adoption
paperwork will be required in both scenarios mentioned above.
**All documents must be originals or certified copies. Photocopies, expired, or
altered documents will not be accepted. If a document is in a different language, a
certified English translation may also be required.
If you seek additional guidance, contact the Driver License department at
302-744-2505 or visit our website at dmv de gov
DRIVING PRIVILEGE CARD REQUIREMENTS
In January 2016, the Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV) began processing
applications for Driving Privilege Cards (DPC). The Delaware DPC is a valid driver
license that is issued for driving purposes only within the state of Delaware and is
not to be used as a valid form of identification. The DPC is only available to foreign
Delaware residents who are unable to produce legal presence within the United
States and meet certain eligibility requirements. **U.S. Citizens and persons with
valid legal presence documents are not eligible for a DPC. **
The fee for the DPC is $20 00 and it is valid for a period of 4 years The Driving
Privilege Permit and Card will bear the distinct verbiage "Driving Privilege Only"
and "Not Valid for Identification" on its face. All DPC holders are susceptible to all
Delaware driving laws, rules, and regulations

-- 23 of 151 --

24
How Do I Get A Driving Privilege Card?
Effective September 11, 2023, all eligible applicants must schedule an appointment with
the Delaware State Bureau of Identification (SBI) to begin the DPC process. To schedule
an appointment please use the link https://uenroll.identogo.com when prompted enter
SERVICE CODE 27S424. SBI will collect fingerprints, validate identification and collect a
$72 fee. SBI will provide a receipt please bring that in with you to DMV.
Applicants must also collect a Certification of Filing Compliance document from
the Delaware Division of Revenue confirming they have filed Delaware taxes for
the previous two years. Applicants should visit the Division of Revenue website
at www.tax.delaware.gov to immediately collect the Certification of Filing
Compliance document or call the Division of Revenue's office at 302-577-8200 to
find your nearest location and pick up one in person. This document will contain the
applicants name and address, years taxes were filed, Individual Tax Identification
Number (ITIN) or Social Security Number (SSN), and a document locator code.
When applicants arrive at DMV they must be prepared and have all required
documents, which must be in their original or certified form. Please see the DPC
Required Documents Tables for required documents. Photocopied, altered, or
expired documents will not be accepted. Documents in foreign languages must
be translated into English by a professional translator and accompany the original
foreign language document
All applicants must sign a DPC application and answer the appropriate questions
on that form Those applicants who are licensed in another state must surrender
their license from the other state. If eligible for a Social Security Number, proof
must be provided. (See DPC Required Documents Table)
Each applicant must pass an eye-screening examination. Some applicants may
be referred to their eye doctor or physician for additional medical exams if they
have a medical or mental condition that may interfere with their ability to operate
a motor vehicle safely
Every applicant is subject to a written and road skills exam
DPC Required Documents Tables
Customers applying for a Delaware Driving Privilege Card (DPC) must provide:
• SBI Receipt.
• Division of Revenue's Certification of Filing Compliance document.
• Valid proof of name and date of birth.
o If under 18, must also have original and translated copy of
birth certificate.
• Valid proof of any/all name change(s) if applicable.
• Two separate valid proofs of Delaware residency

-- 24 of 151 --

25
25
SECTION TWO
Use the following guidelines of acceptable documents in the charts below to help
you determine the documents needed when applying for a Driving Privilege Card
*U.S. Citizens and persons with valid legal presence are not eligible to apply for a DPC*
Provide the following document from State Bureau of Identification (SBI):
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered document will not be accepted)
Receipt from SBI containing:
• Name
• SBI Receipt number
*Will be verified with SBI at DMV upon application*
Provide the following document from Division of Revenue (DOR):
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered document will not be accepted)
Documents from Division of Revenue containing:
• Your (and your spouse and/or dependents) name
• Year taxes were filed
• Yours (and/or your dependents) ITIN/SSN
• Division of Revenue Document Locator Code
*Will be verified with Division of Revenue at DMV upon application*
Provide ONE of the following valid documents
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered document will not be accepted)
Foreign Document that is valid, approved by the Division of Motor Vehicles
(DMV) and electronically verified by DMV:
• Valid, unexpired Foreign Passport
• Valid, unexpired consular identification document issued by your
country of citizenship
*Alternate approved Document for Mexico*
• Mexican Federal Electoral Card (Instituto Federal Electoral (IFE)
Credencial para Votar)
*If under 18, must also have an original and translated copy of their birth
certificate in addition to one of the documents listed above*
Accepted Valid Consular Cards
(Photocopied, Expired, or Altered documents will not be accepted)
*Please note this list is subject to change*
Country Name
• Brazil (Carteira de Matricula Consular)
• Colombia (Consular Registration)
• Ecuador (Tarjeta De Identification Consular)
• Guatemala (Tarjeta de Identificacion Consular)
• Mexico (Matricula Consular)

-- 25 of 151 --

26
Name Change (if applicable)
Provide ALL of the following valid documents
(Photocopied or Altered documents will not be accepted)
• Valid marriage license / civil union certificate – must be issued
by a government entity with a raised seal. Marriage certificates
signed by clergy are not accepted.
• Court ordered name change document
• Finalized divorce decree stating your legal name. (A divorce
decree may be used as authority to resume previous name only
if it contains the new name and the previous name and permits
return to the previous name.)
*Documents must be translated into English by a professional translator*
Provide TWO of the following for proof of Delaware residency:
(Photocopies, printout of bills, non-business letters/cards will not be
accepted)
• Utility Bills
• Credit Card Statement
• Auto or Life Insurance policies
• Bank Account Records
• Employment Records
• Rental Agreements
• U.S. Postal Service change of address confirmation form/
postmarked with forwarding address label
• Other non-personal mail postmarked within the last 60 days
*Mail must have been delivered by the USPS and be postmarked or received
within the last 60 days. (UPS/FedEx/DHL not accepted). Each of the two
proofs of residency must be from separate sources and must display the
person’s physical address, not a P.O. box*
Graduated Driver License
The Graduated Driver License (GDL) program is available for any person seeking
a driver license who is at least age 16 or under age 18 or who is under age 22 and
is receiving special education services under an active Individualized Education
Program (IEP).
The GDL program was designed to reduce the high crash and fatality rate among
young drivers. Eligible GDL participants will receive additional supervised driving
experience and reduced exposure to high-risk driving situations. The required
signatory parent or sponsor will actively participate in training the eligible GDL
participant and determine when the GDL participant is capable of increased
driving authority
NOTE: Participation in the GDL program is optional for any person who is 18 years
of age or older. If opting out of the GDL program requirements, no sponsor is
needed and an eye, knowledge, and road skills exam will be required at DMV.
For more information visit the DMV website at dmv.de.gov or our teen driver
website at www.teendriving.dmv.de.gov

-- 26 of 151 --

27
27
SECTION TWO
GDL: Level One Learner’s Permit
Applicant’s eligibility requirements:
1 Must be at least 16 years old and less than 18 years old – OR – on an
active IEP who is at least 16 years old and less than 22 years old.
2. Must present a Delaware Driver Education Certificate (Blue/White
Certificate) as proof that you passed a certified Delaware Driver
Education Course. If you passed a course in another state, your out-
of-state certificate must be approved by the Department of Education;
this approval must be presented to the Division of Motor Vehicles.
For approval send the certificate to Department of Education, Attn:
Education Associate Driver Education and Private School Services,
Collette Education Resource Center, 35 Commerce Way, Suite 1, Dover,
Delaware 19904, or fax to 302.739.1769 (Telephone 302.857.3320). For
more information visit our website at www doe k12 de us
3 Must provide documentation proving the applicant’s identity,
legal presence, social security number, if eligible, and two proofs
of Delaware residency (the two proofs of Delaware residency
requirement will be waived if the sponsor is a licensed Delaware
driver and lives at the same address as the applicant). A list of
approved documents is contained in the Required Documentation
Table in this chapter (pages 21-23). A list of approved documents for
DPC GDL is contained in the DPC Required Documents Table in this
chapter (pages 24-26 ).
4. All GDL program applications must be signed by a sponsor.
The sponsor is held jointly liable with the GDL applicant for any
damages resulting from the GDL applicant's negligence. The
sponsor has the final authority to determine if the GDL applicant is
capable of handling the responsibility of operating a motor vehicle
and the authority to designate who may supervise the GDL driver.
The sponsor may withdraw their endorsement at any time until the
minor reaches age 18 or the IEP GDL applicant has completed 12
months of the GDL program, thereby cancelling any valid driving
privileges The following sponsors are listed in order of preference:
a. Either father or mother of the GDL applicant if both parents
are living together within this State and the minor resides with
both parents. (Note: Parents are verified by using the GDL
applicant’s original or certified copy of their birth certificate
which must include mother and/or father's name. Step-
parents cannot act as a sponsor unless the GDL applicant is
adopted or appointed their guardian.)
- OR –
b. Father of the GDL applicant, if the father is living within this
State and the GDL applicant resides with the father only.
Mother of the GDL applicant, if the mother is living within this
State and the GDL applicant resides with the mother only.
Father or mother, if the father or mother lives within this State,
and the GDL applicant resides with neither parent, and the
GDL applicant has no legal guardian within this State. (Note:
Parents are verified by using the GDL applicant’s original or
certified copy of their birth certificate which must include
mother and/or father's name. Step-parents cannot act as a
sponsor unless the GDL applicant is adopted or appointed
their guardian.)

-- 27 of 151 --

28
- OR –
c. Legal guardian or court-appointed custodian of the GDL
applicant, duly appointed as such under the laws of this State.
- OR –
d. By any suitable person acceptable to the Secretary of
Transportation or the Chief of Driver Services, 302-744-2556.
Division of Motor Vehicles, Attn: Chief of Driver Services, PO
Box 698, Dover DE 19903
e. The sponsor must sign the GDL applicant’s driver license
application in the presence of a Division licensing employee
f. The sponsor who signs the GDL program application has final
authority over the GDL applicant’s driving privileges and
may withdraw their endorsement at any time during the 12
month GDL program. In the case of minors, after program
completion, the sponsor may with draw their endorsement
until the minor reaches age 18
5 The applicant must pay a $40 00 Class D license fee and pass an eye
screen at the time of application. All new licenses will be 8 year licenses.
6. GDL applicants who require specialized evaluation, training or
equipment to operate a motor vehicle because of a physical or
mental disability will be identified by the driver education teacher
and tested by the Division
GDL: Level One Learner’s Permit Restrictions:
1 Permit must be in the possession of the permit holder when driving
a motor vehicle
2 The permit holder and all passengers, must wear a safety belt or be
secured in a child safety seat or booster seat while the vehicle is in motion
3 The permit holder shall not operate a motor vehicle while using a
cellular telephone, text messaging device, or similar electronic device
4. No passengers other than an adult supervisor and one other
passenger can be in the vehicle during the entire first 12 months of
valid driving authority. However, the passenger restrictions of this
paragraph do not apply to immediate members of the driver's family
as long as the adult supervisor is in the car
5 When the permit holder is under mandatory supervision, the
supervisor must be a properly licensed parent, guardian or licensed
driver (approved by the sponsor) who is at least 25 years of age and
has held a Class D license for at least 5 years The supervising driver
must be seated beside the permit holder in the front seat of the
vehicle when it is in motion. No person other than the supervising
driver can be in the front seat
6. For the first six months after issuance of a Level One Learner's Permit:
a The permit holder must be supervised at all times
b The sponsor shall certify that the permit holder has driven
for 50 hours; 10 of which includes night-time driving The
certification is to be turned in to the Department of Education
after the first six months of valid driving authority.
7. After the first six months of valid Level One Learner's Permit driving
authority:

-- 28 of 151 --

29
29
SECTION TWO
a The permit holder may drive unsupervised between the hours
of 6:00 a m and 10:00 p m
b The permit holder may drive between the hours of 10:00 p m and
6:00 a m only when under supervision Exception: The permit
holder may travel without supervision during those hours when
going directly to and from church activities, work activities, and
the permit holder's school activities on school property.
c. No passengers other than the adult supervisor and one other
passenger can be in the vehicle with the exception of immediate
members of the driver's family provided the adult supervisor is
in the car During the second six month period of unsupervised
driving, when a supervisor is not present, only one other
passenger in addition to the driver can be in the vehicle
8. Persons who violate the Level One Learner's Permit restrictions are
considered as driving without a license which will result in a two-
month suspension for the first offense and a four-month suspension
for subsequent offenses.
Eligibility for a Class D Operator’s License
A GDL Level One Learner’s permit holder who is under age 18 may obtain a Class
D operator's license when they successfully complete the 12-month GDL program,
provided the sponsor has not withdrawn their endorsement and the applicant's driving
privileges are not currently suspended, revoked, canceled, denied, or surrendered. If
a GDL Level One Learner’s permit holder is age 18 or older, they may also obtain a
Class D operator’s license by completing the 12 month GDL program as stated above
– or – may choose to take the eye, written and road skills exam at the DMV.
NOTE: The GDL Level One Learner's Permit will automatically convert to a Class
D license once the permit holder has completed a full 12 months of valid driving
authority. The time used to compute the 12 months of required driving experience
shall not include any period of time when the permit holder's driving privilege has
been suspended, revoked, canceled, denied, or surrendered. A period of additional
driving experience equivalent to that of the suspension, revocation, cancellation,
denial or surrender will be added to the end of the original 12 month period and
the permit holder must undergo complete testing This will ensure that the permit
holder has fully complied with the required 12 months of valid driving authority.
Requirements For First Time Applicants Over Age 18
Temporary Instruction Permit (Learner’s Permit)
The purpose of the learner’s permit is to enable you to drive the class of motor
vehicle for which you want a driver license Payment is due upon application,
and you must pass all exams within twelve months The permit is issued after
successful completion of the eye screening and knowledge exams. After you pass
these exams and pay the required fee, a learner’s permit will be issued for twelve
months While you are learning to drive you must be accompanied by a licensed
driver who is qualified to drive the class of vehicle in which you are training, and
they must be at least 21 years of age
To obtain your license, you must take a road exam, but not until at least 10 days
after the permit was issued
Transfer Of Licenses From Other Jurisdictions Into Delaware
(18 Years of Age or Older)

-- 29 of 151 --

30
Drivers From Other States. If you move into Delaware from another State, you must
apply for a Delaware driver’s license within 60 days after becoming a resident You
must turn in your previously issued out-of-state driver license or have a current
certified copy of your driving record, provide proof of legal presence such as a
birth certificate or passport, proof of social security number, and two proofs of
DE residency. If proper documentation is provided, you will be issued a federally
compliant driver license Please refer to pages 21-24 for a list of acceptable documents
for more information. Applicants will be required to sign an application, a surrender
agreement form, and pass an eye screening Written and road exams may be given,
but they are normally waived if your license is valid. Suspended and revoked licenses
cannot be transferred until all outstanding withdrawal actions are cleared
A motorcycle endorsement from another state is transferrable for an additional
fee. Commercial endorsements Tanker (N), Doubles/Triples (T) and Passenger
(P) are also transferrable. Special restrictions apply regarding the transfer of a
Hazmat (H/X) endorsement, such as a knowledge exam, verification of favorable
background investigation and proof of birth/immigration documents.
The School Bus (S) endorsement is authorized to transfer into Delaware once they
meet requirements set forth by the Delaware Department of Education and in 21
Del. C § 2708 and that they had successfully completed training in a previous state
of record that is equivalent or higher than that completed in the State of Delaware.
Taxi/Limousine (Z) endorsement is non-transferrable.
Drivers From Other Countries and U.S. Territories. Non-resident drivers over the
age of 16 years who have a valid driver license issued by their home county or U.S.
Territory may operate motor vehicles upon the highways of this State when their
license is in their immediate possession
Sixty days after the non-resident driver becomes a Delaware resident, they must
apply for a Delaware driver license Drivers from other countries may retain
their foreign licenses. All drivers licensed in other countries must pass both the
knowledge and road exams
Exception: Delaware has a reciprocity agreement with Germany, Taiwan (Republic of
China) and France thereby exempting these drivers from the knowledge and road exams
for a Class D license only, as well as U.S. Territories. Endorsements are not included in
reciprocity agreements
Transfer Of Licenses From Other Jurisdictions Into Delaware
(Under 18 Years of Age)
Those persons who are at least 16 years old but less than 18 years old and were
issued a driver license by another state must obtain a Delaware license within 60
days after becoming a Delaware resident
a The applicant must have completed an approved driver education
course 	The Department of Education will ensure out-of-state
courses are equivalent to Delaware driver education requirements.
(See Level One Learner’s Permit)
b The applicant must pass a written and road examination conducted
by the Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles and an eye screening.
c The application must be signed by an approved sponsor
d. If the minor applicant was issued an out-of-state license for over 12
months, they may be eligible for a Class D operator’s license after
meeting all testing requirements.
e. If the minor applicant was issued an out-of-state license for less than
12 months, they may be eligible for a Level One Learner’s Permit.

-- 30 of 151 --

31
31
SECTION TWO
License Renewal
Delaware driver licenses can be renewed at any Division of Motor Vehicle facility. Driver
licenses will be issued for eight years, with the exception of Immigration length of stay,
hazmat holders and Driving Privilege Card holders. A $10.00 late fee is charged if the
renewal takes place after the expiration date. If you have a motorcycle endorsement, the
fee is increased by $12.00. If you have a taxi endorsement, the fee is increased by $3.45.
You may renew at any time during the 180-day (six months) period prior to the
expiration of your license. Commercial driver license (CDL) holders are eligible to
renew no earlier than 30 days before the expiration date on their license. Renewal
reminders are sent to each driver approximately 60 days before expiration date
(driver’s birthday). You must turn in your previously issued driver license, fill out an
application, and pass an eye-screening. A knowledge and road exam may be given. If
you moved, you may be required to show proof of residency. You may also be asked
to provide proof of social security number and/or proof of legal presence at renewal.
Permanent License Renewal
The Division of Motor Vehicles no longer issues a permanent driver license as a
result of HB 253. Please refer to Title 21, Section 2716.
Current permanent license holders must return to the Division every eight years
to renew their license The fee for this is $24 00 Permanent license holders
who have a motorcycle endorsement will be charged an extra $12 00 fee for
that endorsement Whenever a permanent license is suspended or revoked, it is
changed to a Class D license upon reinstatement
Exchange Student Licensing Procedures
After completing an approved driver education training program, an exchange
student may apply for a Level One Learner’s Permit. The exchange student must
present the following:
1. A typed notarized statement from their parent, granting permission
for their son or daughter to apply for and be issued a Delaware Level
One Learner’s Permit.
2. If the applicant is under the age of 18, the sponsoring family must
sign the application and assume liability for the minor driver
3. A Certified Birth Certificate (in English) and a legal presence document.
4. A social security number, if eligible.
5. Driver education training certificate, if under age 18.
6 $40 00 will be charged for a 8-year license
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Restricted License
If you have a disability which would interfere with driving a motor vehicle safely,
it may be possible through use of special equipment to compensate for your
disability. Special examinations are required by the Division in such cases, and a
license with restrictions may be issued to you allowing you to drive only when you,
your vehicle, or both are fitted with the specified equipment. A common example
of a restricted license is one which requires you to wear glasses when driving or to
restrict you to daylight driving only. If you drive without the required equipment,
you are subject to arrest and your driver license may be suspended

-- 31 of 151 --

32
Replacement License
If your license is lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may apply online at dmv.de.gov or go to
the Division for a replacement license which will be issued for a fee of $20 00
Name Change
Within 30 days after legally changing your name, you must appear in person at
the DMV to change the name on your driver license or identification card. Prior to
arriving at the Division, if you have not already done so, you should report to the
Social Security office with valid identification and the official document(s) (e.g., court
documents, divorce decree, marriage certificate, etc.) that caused your name to be
legally changed to update their records Please allow 48 hours after updating your
information with the Social Security office before reporting to the DMV to change your
name on your driver license or identification card. This time will allow the Division’s
and the Social Security’s databases to be updated and match. Please also bring to the
Division your old driver license or identification card and all name change documents.
The Division will issue you a new driver license or identification card for $1.15. If you
have any questions regarding this process, please call 302-744-2506.
Address Change
After changing your Delaware address, you have 30 days to notify both the Vehicle
Registration and Driver License Sections of the Division of Motor Vehicles. Address
change may be submitted online at dmv.de.gov or in writing to the Division of
Motor Vehicles, Driver License Section, P.O. Box 698, Dover, Delaware 19903.
You must provide your driver license or identification card (DL/ID) number, your
name as it appears on the credential and your new address so we can update
our records. To update your DL/ID, you must visit any of our facilities and we will
replace your DL/ ID at no cost. However, if you do not have the current DL/ID or
proof that the current DL/ID was stolen, you will be charged a duplicate fee. (See
the Vehicle Equipment, Titles, Registration and Insurance Section for changing the
address on your vehicle registration.)
Identification (ID) Card
The fee for an identification card is $40.00 and it expires eight years from the
applicant’s next birthday The applicant must be a Delaware resident and present
documents as required by the Required Documentation Table. A sponsor who is
the mother or father or a court appointed guardian as listed on the minor’s birth
certificate must accompany any applicant under the age of 18 (see item 4, page 27).
Veteran indicator on Driver License/Identification Card
The Division of Motor Vehicles will, upon submission of satisfactory proof, designate
on a driver license or identification card the
holder is a veteran of the United States Armed
Forces of the National Guard. This designation is
available to any Delaware veteran that served in
the U.S. military and was discharged or released
from service under conditions other than
dishonorable To obtain the veteran indicator
you must have a valid Delaware driver license or
identification card and provide proof of military
service, by presenting any of the following
original documents:
• Military ID
• NGB-22
• DD-214
• DD- 256
• Honorable Discharge
Certificate
• Valid Out of State
driver license with
veteran designation

-- 32 of 151 --

33
33
SECTION TWO
The veteran indicator may be added to your driver license or identification card free
of charge during renewal or duplicate transactions Otherwise, there is a $10 00 fee
The veteran indicator is designed to verify an individual as a veteran in the State of
Delaware, so that businesses can opt to recognize the contributions of those veterans
who have faithfully served our country and represented our great state. It will also afford
the veteran protection as they will no longer have to carry a DD-214, which contains
sensitive information, to prove their veteran status in order to obtain the benefits provided
by local businesses. Please note this is not a military ID card and does not entitle veterans
to all military benefits. Veterans would need to contact the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) to determine the federal benefits in which they are entitled.
The veteran indicator on a driver license/identification card can be obtained at all DMV locations.
Voter Registration
As a result of the enactment of the National Voter Rights Act of 1993, any U.S. citizen
residing in the State of Delaware, who meets the eligibility requirements, is afforded
the opportunity to register to vote while obtaining or renewing a driver license
You may register to vote if you are a U.S. citizen; a bona fide resident of Delaware,
are at least 16 years of age and are mentally competent Please keep in mind,
in order to register you must be at least 18 years of age or older on or before
the day of the general election Ex-felons may register to vote if they meet the
requirements as specified by law according to 15, Del. C Chapter 61.
Part of the registration process involves selecting a political party of your choice
Options include the two majority parties, numerous minority parties or, if you do
not wish to be affiliated with any political party, you may register as an Unaffiliated.
Only members of a majority party (Democrats and Republicans) are eligible to
vote in primary elections in the State of Delaware.
Pursuant to Delaware law (15 Del. C. § 2050A), every person who completes an
application for the issuance or renewal of their Delaware driver license, learners
permit, or identification card or completes an application to change their name or
address on these documents, and is not already registered to vote, is of sufficient age,
and whose citizenship status has been confirmed by the Division of Motor Vehicles, is
automatically registered to vote by the Department of Elections as Unaffiliated.
Shortly after registering, you will receive a polling card from the Department of Elections.
This card confirms your registration and provides the name and address of the location
where you will cast your vote on election day. If you were automatically registered to vote
you will receive a Notice of Automatic Voter Registration in the mail from the Department
of Elections. If you have any questions or concerns, call the elections office nearest you.
Department of Elections
Office of the State Election Commissioner
905 S Governors Ave Ste 170, Dover DE 19904
Phone: (302) 739-4277
Email: coe_vote@state de us
Website: http://elections.delaware.gov/
New Castle County Office
820 N French St Ste 400
Wilmington DE 19801
Phone: (302) 577-3464
Email: votencc@state de us
Website: http://electionsncc.delaware.gov/
Kent County Office
100 Enterprise Pl Ste 5, Dover DE 19904
Phone: (302) 739-4498
Email: votekc@state de us
Website: http://electionskc.delaware.gov/
Sussex County Office
119 N Race St, Georgetown DE 19947
Phone: (302) 856-5367
Email: votesc@state de us
Website: http://electionssc.delaware.gov/

-- 33 of 151 --

34
Medical Indicator
A blue medical indicator may appear
on the document as a means for the
holder to share a medical condition to
those giving emergency medical care
The specific medical condition will
appear on the back of the document
The medical indicator is a voluntary
option, and not a requirement.
Visor Communication Card
Visor Communication card application for deaf or hard of hearing individuals is
available upon request and on the website.
Megan’s Law/Sex Offenders
By signing the driver license or identification card application form, applicants
acknowledge that the Division of Motor Vehicles has notified them that registration
in compliance with Section 4120 of Title 11, Delaware law, is mandatory for any
person who has been convicted in any state of any offense which if committed
or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the
offenses referenced in Section 4120(a) of Title 11, and that such registration
must occur within seven days of coming into any county, city, or town in which
they temporarily reside or is domiciled for that length of time The form will be
permanently retained. There is a $5.00 fee to add the “Y” restriction.
Mandatory Disclosure Of Social Security Numbers
Disclosure of the applicant’s social security number is mandatory if eligible
Federal law authorizes such disclosure. See 42 U.S.C. Section 405(c)(2)(1). The
Division will use social security numbers solely for the administration of the driver
license program to ensure accurate identification. Social security numbers will not
be released to businesses or private individuals, but may be released to State
agencies to carry out their governmental functions
Selective Service System Registration
Male applicants are to understand that their signature on license or identification
card applications constitutes consent to be registered with the Selective Service
System, if so required.
Next of Kin Registry
Delaware’s Next of Kin registry is a voluntary program designed to provide
Delaware citizens that hold a valid ID or driver license the option to designate up
to two different emergency contacts, a primary and a secondary, so that in the
event of an emergency, emergency personnel are able to contact your loved ones
To register go to dmv.de.gov or visit your local DMV branch.
Organ And Tissue Donor Program
When you apply for, or renew, a driver license in Delaware, you will be asked
if you wish to be an Organ and Tissue Donor. If you say yes, a “RED HEART”,
will be displayed on your license. There are brochures available at the DMV front
desk containing information about your donation. In order to prevent confusion
and misunderstandings upon your death, we suggest you also inform your family
of your decision to be an organ and tissue donor Once you have designated

-- 34 of 151 --

35
35
SECTION TWO
yourself as an Organ and Tissue Donor, this designation once you die, may not
be revoked according to Delaware law More nationwide information is available at
www.organdonor.gov or for more localized information go to www.donors1.org
Good Samaritan's Law
Delaware’s Good Samaritan Laws protect
individuals who request medical assistance
for someone who is experiencing a drug
or alcohol overdose. It also protects the
witness and person they’re assisting from
being prosecuted for possession of an illegal
substance These laws encourage individuals
to call 9-1-1 or seek medical attention for
individuals at risk of dying from an overdose
or other life-threatening emergency
Good Samaritan laws also protect individuals from civil damages for administering
naloxone, a life-saving medication that can reverse an opioid overdose, or
emergency care to an individual, who is experiencing an overdose. For more
information concerning Good Samaritan Laws, you can visit Help Is Here’s website:
https://www.helpisherede.com/addiction/harm-reduction/good-samaritan-law#laws
TAT- Human Trafficking
Human trafficking is modern-day slavery. It occurs in the
U.S. and Canada when people are subject to forced labor
or illegally bought and sold for commercial sex. A minor
being sold for sex is a victim of human trafficking. The
recruitment or purchase of victims may occur online, but
survivors may be recovered in many locations, including
truck stops, local businesses, restaurants, hotels, strip
clubs, private homes, etc The movement of victims may
include the use of rideshares, taxis or other modes of
transportation
Red flags:
• Different cars coming in and out of one particular residence or business, or
people approaching vehicles on the street, rest areas or truck stops
• Extreme security measures on homes and businesses that appear out of place
(e.g., barred, or covered windows, barbed wire, excessive exterior cameras, locked
front doors with entrances in the alley, etc.)
• Workers who appear to live at the place of business or are always working
• Restricted or controlled communication; not allowed to speak for self; being
watched or followed
• Any mention of making a quota or having a pimp/daddy
• Signs of branding or tattooing of trafficker’s name (often on the neck)
You can find more information on human trafficking at https://tatnonprofit.org/

-- 35 of 151 --

36
DRIVER LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS
Class D Operator’s License
This class of license includes passenger
cars, station wagons, pickup trucks, utility
vehicles, and most panel trucks This type
and class of license is valid for any single
motor vehicle, and a trailer, with gross vehicle
weight ratings (GVWR) not greater than
26,000 pounds, designed to carry less than
16 passengers (including the driver), and not
placarded for the purpose of transporting
hazardous materials
Commercial Driver Licenses (CDL)
There is a Delaware Commercial Driver Manual which covers the CDL requirements,
CDL procedures, testing requirements, and the basic knowledge required to obtain
a CDL license. The manual is available for no cost at any Division facility or can be
downloaded from the DMV website at dmv.de.gov
The requirement for a CDL is waived when the driver is operating farm equipment,
firefighting equipment, recreational vehicles, or military members operating
military vehicles, including the National Guard.
Non-CDL Class A and Non-CDL Class B licenses are issued to those drivers who
operate farm, firefighting equipment, and other authorized emergency vehicles under
this waiver. No special licenses are required when operating personal recreation
vehicles and military equipment. The following defines these waived class of vehicles:
a. Farm vehicles which are:
1 Controlled and operated by a farmer
2 Used to transport either agricultural products, farm machinery,
farm supplies or both to or from a farm
3. Not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier.
4 Used within 150 miles of the person’s farm, and
5. Not used for hire.
b. Firefighting equipment which is:
1. Used by any fire company in this State for the preservation of life or
property or the execution of emergency governmental functions
2. Being operated under the authorization of a fire company for
parades, special events, repair service, delivery or other such
authorized movements
c. Military equipment owned by the Department of Defense, including
the National Guard, when operated by persons on active military
duty or members of the reserves and National Guard on active full-
time or part-time duty
d. Recreational vehicles or trailers defined in Title 21 which provide
temporary living quarters and are used solely for recreational purposes.
e Emergency Mobile Communication Units operated in relation to a County
Emergency Communication Center, the State Police, or any municipality.
f. Any other emergency vehicle, as defined by Title 21, used in the
preservation of life or property or in the execution of emergency
governmental functions

-- 36 of 151 --

37
37
SECTION TWO
Commercial Learners Permit (CLP)
After passing the knowledge exams and paying a $5.00 fee, you may be issued
a CDL learner’s permit which will allow you to drive a Commercial Motor Vehicle
(CMV), but only with another licensed CDL driver. You may only drive the class
of vehicle specified on your learner’s permit, and you may drive only with a CDL
driver qualified in the same type CMV.
CDL Class A License
This license is required for any combination of vehicles with a Gross Combined
Weight Rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the GVWR of the
towed unit(s) is in excess of 10,000 pounds.
CDL Class B License
This license is required for any single vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
(GVWR) of 26,001 or more pounds, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in
excess of 10,000 pounds
CDL Class C License
This license is required for any single vehicle or combination of vehicles with a
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of less than 26,001 pounds or any such
vehicle towing a vehicle with a GVWR not in access of 10,000 pounds that is either
designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver or used in the
transportation of hazardous materials which requires the vehicle to be placarded.
NON - CDL Class A License
Required for the same CMV vehicles as the CDL Class A license, but only when operating
farm, firefighting vehicles, and other authorized emergency vehicles under a CDL waiver.
NON - CDL Class B License
Required for the same CMV vehicles as the CDL Class B license, but only when operating
farm, firefighting vehicles, Department of Corrections, Bureau of Prisons, Bureau of
Community Corrections, and other authorized emergency vehicles under a CDL waiver.
Class D & DPC Learner Permit
This permit authorizes the holder to operate those vehicles that a holder of a
Class D or DPC operator’s license may operate The permit authorizes its holders
to operate a Class D vehicle under the condition that the permit holder is
accompanied by a properly licensed driver over the age of 21
Graduated Driver License Permit
Authorizes the holder to operate those vehicles that a holder of a Class D or DPC
operator’s license may operate, but under restrictions defined in the Graduated
Driver License program.
Temporary License
When temporarily out-of-state, a temporary license may be issued to the holder of a
valid Class D operator’s license to extend the expiration date, to replace a lost license,
or in lieu of the Class D licensing document, as long as the driver license holder is not
suspended, revoked, disqualified, cancelled, or denied in this state or any other state.

-- 37 of 151 --

38
This one-time temporary license is issued for a period not to exceed six months
Conditional, Occupational, and Hardship Licenses
These licenses grant limited driving privileges under very specific parts of Delaware
law. The limited driving privileges granted are defined on the license.
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Endorsement/License
Authorizes the holder to operate a vehicle with full Class D or DPC operators driving
privileges only when the vehicle is equipped with an ignition interlock device.
ENDORSEMENTS
Motorcycle Endorsement
Any person who operates a motorcycle, motorbike, or other two or three-wheeled
motor-driven vehicle on the highways shall have a driver license with a motorcycle
endorsement Persons over the age of 18 must pass a knowledge and road skills
exam to obtain a motorcycle endorsement
A person who passes a knowledge and skills examination administered by the
Division on a three-wheeled motor vehicle shall have a restriction placed on their
driver license, in addition to the motorcycle endorsement, limiting them to the
operation of three-wheeled motor vehicles
Persons under the age of 18 must have the motorcycle application signed by their
parents or the duly appointed legal guardian They must complete the Motorcycle
Rider Education Program as approved by the Division.
The Division publishes a Delaware Motorcycle Operator Manual which covers the
requirements for the motorcycle endorsement, procedures to acquire the endorsement,
testing requirements, and the basic knowledge needed to obtain this endorsement.
Any person who obtains a new endorsement for a motorcycle, or someone riding with
the newly endorsed person, is required by law to wear a helmet and eye protection
for the first 2 years after the newly endorsed person receives the endorsement. A
person operating or riding as a passenger on a motorcycle on the roadways of this
State who fails to comply with this law is subject to civil penalties or assessments.
Motorcycle Rider Classes
New Castle County 	Kent County 	Sussex County
302-832-5163 	302-744-2658 	302-853-1030
Call for further information or to register for classes
Motorcycle Learner Permit
Once you have passed the knowledge exam, you will be issued a motorcycle permit
which is valid for six months You can extend the permit only once for an additional
six months. You must apply for an extension at DMV before the expiration date
and pay a $5 00 fee The following restrictions apply when operating a motorcycle
with a temporary instruction permit
1. No passengers shall be allowed on the motorcycle.
2 Operating a motorcycle between sunset and sunrise is prohibited
3. Approved safety helmet and eye protection must be worn.
4 Operation is not permitted on the federal interstate highway system

-- 38 of 151 --

39
39
SECTION TWO
School Bus Endorsement
To drive a school bus, the driver must have a CDL with a passenger and school bus
endorsement To obtain a school bus endorsement, drivers must not have had their
license suspended, revoked, or disqualified in this State or in any other jurisdiction for
moving violations in the last five years, and not have more than five points (full point
value) on their record for the past three years. They must successfully complete
theory instruction, demonstrate proficiency in all behind-the-wheel training
requirements aboard a school bus, a medical exam, and a criminal background
check, as well as pass a specialized knowledge exam for school bus applicants, and a
skills and road exam in a school bus Please refer to 21 Del. C § 2708 for a complete
list of requirements. If you are applying for a “S” School Bus endorsement, you must
first submit the Criminal History Record Check Authorization Form.
As of December 14, 2020, all school bus “S” applicants must initiate the application
process by completing a DMV Criminal History Record Check Form online. The “S”
applicant will visit https://cdlis.dmv.de.gov/cdlis/ to complete the online Criminal
History Record Check Form (CHRCA).
Taxi/Limo Endorsement
All persons who operate a taxicab or limousine on Delaware highways must have
a valid license, endorsed to operate the taxicab or limousine The driver must
complete a defensive driving course within 30 days from an approved provider,
complete a state and federal background check indicating no serious criminal
offenses, not have had their license suspended or revoked for moving violations in
the past three years, and pass the Class D knowledge exam Please refer to 21 Del
C. § 2763 and 2 DE Admin Code 2287 for a complete list of requirements and visit
dmv.gov for a complete list of approved providers. If you are applying for a “Z”
Taxi/Limo endorsement, you must first submit the Criminal History Record Check
Authorization Form for approval via email, fax or in person.
NOTE: Out of State Taxi/Limo endorsements are not transferrable
THE DRIVER EXAMINATION
The purpose of the driver examination is to determine whether you have sufficient
knowledge and driving skills necessary to drive safely on Delaware highways The
examination consists of four parts
If your Class D driving privileges have been cancelled, denied, disqualified, expired,
revoked, and/or suspended over one year, you are required to take the vision and
Class D knowledge exam. After successful completion, you must reapply for Class
D driving privileges. However, if it has been over 5 years, you must reapply for
your Class D license and take the vision, knowledge, and road exams
If your CDL driving privileges have been cancelled, denied, disqualified, expired,
revoked or suspended over one year, you are required to take the vision and Class
D knowledge exam. After successful completion, you must reapply for commercial
driving privileges
Vision Screening
Your vision will be screened to determine whether you can see well enough to drive
safely. If the screening shows that you need glasses or contact lenses, your license
certificate will be marked to indicate that you cannot drive legally without them.
Minimum acceptable vision for a Delaware driver license is 20/40, with or without

-- 39 of 151 --

40
glasses or contact lenses Permission for daylight only driving may be granted if
your vision is between 20/40 and 20/50. CDL physical and vision requirements
are contained in the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR Part 391.41).
Highway Sign And Signal Test
You will be asked to identify certain highway signs only by their shape, color, or
the symbols appearing on them You will also have to explain the meaning of these
and other highway signs, traffic signals, and pavement markings. The meanings
are explained in the Rules of the Road section of this manual.
For example, you may be asked to identify these or other shapes without their labels:
(Stop) 	(Yield) 	(School)
You may be asked to identify the type of signals associated with these or other colors:
(Stop) 	(Prepare to stop) 	(Proceed with caution)
Or you may be asked to identify symbols such as these:
(Keep to right) 	(No U-turn) 	(No right turn)
Rules Of The Road Test
You will be asked to answer a series of questions based on Delaware’s rules of the
road, motor vehicle laws and safety practices. For example, you might be asked
what the speed limit is for automobiles on two-lane roads; what actions are taken
when you see a flashing red signal ahead; or under what conditions you should not
pass another vehicle You might also be asked what you should do if your vehicle
starts to skid, or how far away from a fire hydrant you may legally park.
Road Test
You are eligible to take a Class D or
motorcycle road exam 10 days after you
pass the knowledge exam. Road exams
are given on every weekday, except
Wednesday. DMV offers 2 easy and
convenient options for you to schedule
your road exam when you feel you are
ready. You may use DMV's online My Road
Test scheduler or call your local DMV
office to speak with a DMV associate.

-- 40 of 151 --

41
41
SECTION TWO
1. Visit the DMV website at dmv.de.gov
a. Select "Online Services"
b. Select "My Road Test" and follow the online instructions
2. Call a DMV office of your choosing:
a Delaware City 	302-832-5176
b Dover 	302-744-2515
c Georgetown 	302-853-1003
d Wilmington 	302-434-3220
e. Select "My Road Test" and follow the online instructions
Upon arriving for your ROAD EXAM you must have the following in your
possession:
• Valid learner's permit
• Valid driver license of the accompanying driver who is at least 21 years of
age (excludes motorcycle skills exam).
• Valid registration card for the vehicle you will be using (and trailer if applicable)
• Valid insurance card (original or electronic) for the vehicle you will be using
You will be required to drive for approximately 30 minutes and do such things as
are usual in normal driving You will not be asked to do anything that is contrary
to the motor vehicle laws or safe driving practices. You will be required to
demonstrate the following:
• Respond to road signs,
traffic signals and
pavement markings
• Parallel parking
• Three point turn
• Make right and left turns
• Change lanes
• Use right-of-way rules
• Maintain proper speed
• Back 50 feet
• Merge with traffic
• Follow and overtake vehicles
• Enter intersections
• Inspect vehicle for safety
• Know vehicle controls
Road Test Locations
Wilmington DMV 	Delaware City DMV 	Dover DMV 	Georgetown DMV
2230 Hessler
Boulevard
New Castle, DE
19720
(302) 434-3220
2101 Mid County
Drive
New Castle, DE
19720
(302) 832-5176
303
Transportation
Circle
P O Box 698
Dover, DE 19903
(302) 744-2515
23737 DuPont
Blvd
Georgetown, DE
19947
(302) 853-1003
Motor Vehicle To Be Driven During Road Test
It is your responsibility to provide the motor vehicle to be driven during the road
exam. It must be properly registered and pass our safety inspection. You must
provide valid proof of registration and liability insurance. Furthermore, the vehicle
must be within the license class for which you have applied The examiner will

-- 41 of 151 --

42
conduct a basic vehicle safety inspection before the road exam begins You must
refrain from smoking during the exam. No cell phone use or playing of music is
permitted during the road test
When You Must Be Accompanied By A Licensed Driver
If you do not have a valid Class D driver license with a legal right to drive alone in
Delaware, you must be accompanied by a licensed driver over 21 years of age, as
described on the learner’s permit. A licensed driver MUST remain on site to drive
the vehicle away in case the applicant is unsuccessful in passing the exam
Preparation For The Driver Examination
One of the purposes of this manual is to help you prepare to take the driver
examination. You should study this manual carefully. Anything which is not
perfectly clear, whether contained in this manual or not, should be discussed with
the driver license examiner prior to your examination
If you plan to apply for a license class other than a Class D driver license, or for
the motorcycle endorsement, or commercial driver license, you will also need to
study separate manuals which are available at the offices of the Division of Motor
Vehicles (see back cover for locations where you may pick up these manuals) or
visit the DMV website at dmv.de.gov
If you fail any part of the road exam, you should prepare yourself thoroughly to
take it again at a later date You must wait at least ten days before taking the exam
or exams again
Sample driver license examinations are available on the DMV website, at https://www.
dmv.de.gov/sampledlexam/sampledlexam.ejs?command=SampleDLExamHome 	or
on the DelDOT mobile app
MEDICAL INFORMATION AND REPORTING
Medical evaluation forms and vision evaluation forms may be found on the DMV
website at dmv.de.gov
Self-Reporting Of Medical Conditions
To ensure the safety of all individuals, customers should self-report any changes in
their health that might affect their ability to drive When applying for or renewing
a Delaware driver license, the applicant will be required to self-declare, report, or
show certification concerning any medical conditions that may interfere with their
ability to safely operate a motor vehicle. The applicant may be required to submit
a favorable medical report from a licensed practitioner stating that the driver’s
medical condition is under sufficient control to permit them to safely operate
a motor vehicle. Any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle based on this
report may be required to furnish the division with a new medical report every
year no later than the last day of the person’s birthday month. Failure to provide a
favorable medical report will result in the suspension of a person’s driver’s license
Upon receipt of a favorable medical report, a reinstatement fee of $50 must be
paid to the Division of Motor Vehicles to reinstate their license.
Special Examinations
Section 2714 of Title 21, Delaware law, allows the Division to accept requests for
the re-examination of a person’s ability to safely operate a motor vehicle These
requests may be submitted by members of a driver’s immediate family, law
enforcement, or licensed practitioner To maintain a person’s driving privilege, they

-- 42 of 151 --

43
43
SECTION TWO
are required to provide favorable medical report(s) and successfully complete
the Division’s eye screening, knowledge and driving skills exams, and possibly
complete a certified driver rehabilitation evaluation and/or training.
Medical Review/Medical Suspension
Any person who is subject to loss of consciousness or have any other medical
condition that may impair their ability to safely operate a motor vehicle will not
be issued a Delaware driver license unless the Division receives a medical report
(Medical Report of Physician’s Findings MV-346) from the person’s licensed
practitioner stating that such person’s medical condition is under sufficient
control to permit them to safely operate a motor vehicle. Any person licensed
to operate a motor vehicle who is referred to on this report will be required
to furnish the Division with a new medical report every year no later than the
last day of the person’s birthday month. Failure to provide a favorable medical
report will result in the suspension of the person’s driver’s license Upon receipt
of a favorable report, a reinstatement fee of $50 must be paid to the Division
of Motor Vehicles. For further questions regarding medical suspension please
contact the medical section at 302-744-2507
As of August 2024, DMV no longer requires mandatory reporting of medical
conditions. Licensed practitioners are encouraged to report patients who may
pose a danger driving
Medical Surrender
A driver license may be voluntarily surrendered to the Division if a favorable
medical report cannot be obtained Upon receipt of a favorable medical report,
there is no fee for reinstatement if the license is voluntarily surrendered before
the suspension date. If the license has been surrendered for more than one
year, additional testing will be required. For further questions regarding Medical
Surrender, please contact the Medical Section at 302-744-2507 or by email at
dmvmedicalsection@delaware.gov
LICENSE REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION
Driving is a privilege not a right. The State grants you the privilege of operating
motor vehicles only as long as you drive safely and obey the rules and regulations
If you violate driving laws, your driving privilege may be suspended or revoked.
The period of the suspension or revocation varies with the type of offense(s)
committed. A fee of $50.00 must be paid to reinstate a suspended license; a
$200.00 fee is charged to reinstate a revoked license. You may be required to
complete all driver license knowledge, road, and eye screening before reinstating
your license. Suspension of a license is a temporary removal of your driving
privilege. Revocation of a license is a cancellation of your driving privilege. For
questions regarding license suspension you may call 302-744-2509. For questions
regarding license revocation you may call 302-744-2508. For questions regarding
serious medical conditions you may call 302-744-2507
The Division will suspend or revoke the license of any Delaware resident who has
been convicted of a violation in another state which, if committed in Delaware,
would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license The driving record
includes all convictions, even those committed in other states
Mandatory Revocations
The following are mandatory revocations:

-- 43 of 151 --

44
• Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
• Hit-and-run driving involving death or injury to another person.
• Attempting to flee from a police officer after having received a visual
or audible signal to stop your vehicle
• Three convictions for reckless driving in a period of 12 consecutive months
• Contributing to the death of anyone by operating a vehicle
• The crime of assault in which a death occurs from operating a vehicle
• Using a motor vehicle in committing any serious crime
• Making a false statement or using fraudulent information
• Underage possession/consumption of alcohol by persons under 21
years of age
If you post a bond after being arrested for any of the causes listed above, and you do
not appear in court, your license shall be revoked just as if you had been convicted
Habitual Offender Revocation
After an accumulation of certain types of traffic violation convictions, the driver
may be declared a habitual offender and their license may be revoked for up to
five years. No work or hardship licenses are issued to those convicted of being a
habitual offender
Any combination of three of the following offenses in a five year period may
convict you as a habitual offender:
1 Manslaughter
2 Use of a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony
3. Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
4 Driving without a license
5 Driving during suspension or revocation
6. Reckless driving.
7. Failing to stop at the scene of a crash.
8. Failing to identify yourself at the scene of a crash.
9. Making a false statement to the Division of Motor Vehicles.
10. Violation of an occupational license.
11. Failing to stop on the command of a police officer.
Any combination of the above offenses and lesser offenses, such as speeding, that
result in 10 convictions in three years may convict you as a habitual offender
Suspension Of A Driver License
The Division of Motor Vehicles will suspend the driver license of any Delaware
resident whenever the Division has reason to believe that such a person:
1. Has committed any offense for which a license suspension is mandatory.
2. Has by reckless or unlawful operation of a motor vehicle contributed
to a crash resulting in injury or death to any person or caused serious
property damage
3. Is incompetent to drive a motor vehicle for serious medical or mental
conditions

-- 44 of 151 --

45
45
SECTION TWO
4. Has committed a serious violation of motor vehicle laws.
5. Has driven a motor vehicle without the consent of its owner.
6. Has issued a non-collectible payment to the Division.
7. Racing (speed exhibition).
8. Spinning wheels.
9. Turfing (causing destruction to grass, yards, property, etc.).
10. Failing to answer a court summons in any state.
11. Has violated any of the licensing provision of the Delaware Code including:
• Use of fictitious, suspended, revoked or borrowed driver license.
• Loaning a driver license to another person.
• Failure to surrender a suspended or revoked license.
• Giving a fictitious name or address or making a false statement
in applying for a license
• Unlawful manufacture or possession of a false insurance document
• Driving an uninsured motor vehicle or driving without insurance
card in possession
• Passing a stopped school bus
• Altering a driver license or using a fraudulent license.
• Failure to pay child support.
• Failure to surrender license plate after cancelling insurance
on a vehicle
Child Support Delinquency
Any person who owes $1,000.00 or more in arrears or retroactive support and is
30 or more days delinquent in payment of a child support order from either Family
Court or the Division of Child Support Services may have their license suspended
as defined in Title 13 Delaware Code Section 516. The suspension will remain in
effect until a release is obtained from the requesting agency and received by the
Division of Motor Vehicles. A reinstatement fee of $50.00 must be paid to the
Division of Motor Vehicles in order to reinstate the license.
DRIVER IMPROVEMENT PROBLEM
DRIVER PROGRAM
The Driver Improvement Problem Driver Program is designed to identify problem
drivers, to change the problem driver’s behavior by providing information and
training opportunities and, if necessary, to progressively impose sanctions as
more convictions/points are accumulated on individual’s driving records. This
program is governed by Division Regulation 2208. The goal of the program is
crash prevention The steps in the program are geared to the seriousness of the
driving record and may result in an advisory letter, mandatory suspension, and/or
completion of a behavioral modification/attitudinal-driving course.
If suspended as a result of the Problem Driver Program, a $50.00 reinstatement
fee must be paid to the DMV in order to reinstate the license.

-- 45 of 151 --

46
Delaware Point System
Violation 	Points
Speeding 	1-9 miles per hour (mph) over posted limit 	2
Speeding 	10-14 mph over posted limit 	4
Speeding 	15-l9 mph over posted limit 	5
Speeding 	20 mph or more over posted limit 	5*
Passing a Stopped School Bus 	6*
Reckless Driving 	6
Operation of a Vehicle Causing Death 	6*
Aggressive Driving 	6
Disregarding Stop Sign or Red Light 	3
Other Moving Violations (contained in Chapters 27, 41, and 42 of Title 21) 	2
*May result in additional actions including suspension
The Division may take administrative action against a driver who acquires 8 or more
points within a two year period. The points are calculated internally, specifically
for this action and are credited as follows: full point value for the first 12 months
from the date of violation and half point value for the second 12 months from date
of violation. All actions are based upon-calculated points with a 24 month period
following the offense This process does not apply to Commercial Driver License
holders
The points displayed on a driving record are full value for the requested time and
will not show the Calculate Point Value.
Driver Improvement Problem Driver Program Actions
Calculated Action Item
Points
8 	The Division of Motor Vehicles sends the driver an advisory letter.
12 	Driver must complete a behavior modification/attitudinal-
driving course within 90 days after notification (unless
extended by DMV). Failure to comply or upon preference of
the driver, mandatory 2-month suspension will be imposed
14 	Mandatory 4-month license suspension To become eligible
for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have
completed a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course
within the previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement
16 	Mandatory 6-month license suspension To become eligible for
reinstatement, the driver must complete or have completed a
behavioral modification/attitudinal-driving course within the
previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement
18 	Mandatory 8-month license suspension To become eligible for
reinstatement, the driver must complete or have completed
a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course within the
previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement
20 	Mandatory 	10-month 	license 	suspension 	To 	become
eligible for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have
completed a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course
within the previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement

-- 46 of 151 --

47
47
SECTION TWO
Driver Improvement Problem Driver Program Actions
Calculated Action Item
Points
22 	Mandatory 12-month license suspension To become eligible
for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have completed
a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course within the
previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement
Point Credit
A speeding violation of 1 to 14 mph over the posted speed limit will not be assessed
points, IF:
• It is the first violation within any 3-year period; and
• The ticket is paid through the Voluntary Assessment Center or Alderman’s
Court recorded as a “guilty mail in” or through an online payment.
• Only applies to Class D license holders; CDL holders will receive points
Serious Speeding Violations
1. Advisory letters are sent to the driver when convicted for speeding
20-24 mph over the posted speed limit
2 The driver will be suspended for one month when convicted of
driving 25 mph over the posted speed limit The length of suspension
will increase by one month for each additional five mph over the
initial 25-mph threshold The driver may elect to attend the behavior
modification/attitudinal-driving course in lieu of a license suspension
when driving 25-29 mph over the posted limit. For speeding 30
mph over the posted limit or more, the suspension is mandatory To
become eligible for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have
completed a behavior modification/attitudinal driving-course within
the previous two years
3 One-year suspension when convicted of driving 50 mph or more
over the posted speed limit or driving 100 mph on a highway To
become eligible for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have
completed a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course within
the previous two years
Occupational License
The Division may issue an occupational license during the period of suspension
under the Driver Improvement Problem Driver Program if the suspension has created
an extreme hardship, unless the driver is suspended or revoked for other Title 21
convictions. An occupational license shall not be issued if the driver has had two
previous suspensions under this policy within the previous three years or has been
issued an occupational license during the previous 12 months Occupational licenses
are not issued during the first month of the suspension. If the calculated point level
reaches 15 or more points in a 24-month period, an occupational license will not be
issued until the calculated points are less than 15 points Upon conviction for a charge
of operating a motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions of the occupational license,
the Division will extend the period of suspension for an additional like period The
Division will also direct the person to surrender the occupational license

-- 47 of 151 --

48
Driving During Suspension Or Revocation
A conviction for driving during suspension or revocation shall extend the period of
suspension or revocation for a like period, up to one year. No driving authority will be
permitted during the balance of the initial suspension or revocation and the extended
period. Any driving authority previously issued by the Division must be surrendered.
For further information regarding the Driver Improvement Problem Driver
Program, please contact the Driver Improvement Unit at 302-744-2509.
Aggressive Driving
The intent of Delaware’s aggressive driving law is to identify aggressive drivers
and change their high-risk driving habits by requiring their attendance in a specific
training program. The ultimate goal is crash prevention. Aggressive driving is
defined in terms of existing Title 21 offenses such as failure to yield, unsafe lane
change, disregard of a traffic control device, failure to stop at the command of a
police officer, following too closely, passing on a shoulder, and speeding. Individuals
convicted of three or more of these offenses as a result of continuous conduct
are guilty of aggressive driving and are subject to increased penalties Offenders
will be fined between $100.00 and $300.00 for the first offense. Additionally,
offenders are required to complete a behavioral modification/attitudinal-driving
course within 90 days after the conviction for aggressive driving. Failure to attend
the course will result in suspension of the individual’s driving privilege
For further information regarding the Driver Improvement Problem Driver
Program, please contact the Driver Improvement Unit at 302-744-2509.
Approved Behavioral Modification/Attitudinal-Driving Courses
The Secretary of Transportation has approved certain agencies to provide the
behavioral modification/attitudinal –driving course. The course is a minimum of
eight hours long and is offered in all three counties The fee for the course is
$100 00 and is payable to the course provider When you complete the behavior
modification course, the provider will send the notification of completion
electronically to DMV within 48 hours. Please visit dmv.de.gov for a list of
approved course providers
Defensive Driving Courses
The division may consider the satisfactory completion of an approved defensive
driving course as a three-point credit that is used to calculate driver penalties
within the DMV. This does not decrease your overall point value which is used for
employment and insurance review purposes The three-point credit is only applied to
future violations, for Administrative action, and does not remove or reduce existing
DMV points. The course remains valid for three years from the completion date.
Please visit dmv.de.gov for a list of approved course providers
IMPAIRED DRIVING
Drinking And Driving
Nationally in 2019, alcohol was involved in about 28% of fatalities. In Delaware, in
2019, 35% of fatal crashes were impaired related. If you drink alcohol, even a little,
your chances of being in a crash are much greater than if you did not drink any
alcohol

-- 48 of 151 --

49
49
SECTION TWO
No one can drink alcohol and drive safely, even if you have been driving for many
years. New drivers are more affected by alcohol than experienced drivers because
they are still learning to drive
A sobering fact about alcohol. It’s not what you drink. It’s how much. A 12-ounce
can of beer, a 5-ounce glass of wine, and a cocktail with 1 5-ounces of 80 proof
distilled spirits all contain the same amount of alcohol
Because drinking alcohol and then driving is so dangerous, the penalties are very
tough. People who drive after drinking risk heavy fines, higher insurance rates, loss
of license, and even jail sentences
Drinking And Blood Alcohol Concentration
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is simply a precise way of stating the amount
of alcohol in a quantity of blood. It is expressed in percentages and is measured
by chemical analysis
Immediately after an alcoholic beverage is swallowed, the alcohol starts to move
from the stomach into the bloodstream The rate of this movement and how much
alcohol gets into the blood depends primarily on how much alcohol is in the drinks
taken The rate at which alcohol moves to the bloodstream is governed to a lesser
extent by the amount of food in the stomach and the intestines. It depends only
to a very limited extent upon how the drinks are mixed Thus, two ounces of pure
alcohol taken into the stomach within a period of one hour will result in about the
same blood alcohol concentration whether consumed as martinis, straight shots,
highballs, wine, beer, or a mixture of these
The lower the weight of the drinker, the lower the amount of alcoholic beverage it
takes to bring the blood alcohol concentration to a specified level. It takes about half
as much for a person weighing 100 pounds as for another weighing 200 pounds
There are differences in the way individuals react to drinking, but in general,
when a person drinks a given amount of alcoholic beverage, their blood alcohol
concentration can be predicted
In Delaware a BAC of .08 or greater or the presence of any illicit or recreational
drug is conclusive evidence that a driver is under the influence. However, a driver
can be charged with driving under the influence if the BAC is under .08. If a driver
refuses chemical testing, their license may be revoked
More stringent rules apply to those under 21 years of age Underage consumption
or possession of alcohol, even if not related to operating a motor vehicle, can
result in a license revocation Delaware’s zero tolerance statute mandates a license
revocation for underage drivers with a .02 BAC. If convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol, the minor’s license may be revoked until they reach the age
of 21 years
Any driver operating a commercial motor vehicle who refuses to submit to
a breath or blood test to determine their BAC, or whose BAC is .04 or more,
will be disqualified from driving a commercial vehicle for one year; a lifetime
disqualification may be imposed for a second conviction. New federal requirements
were implemented as of September 30, 2005, for CDL holders driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs while driving a non-commercial vehicle. If convicted,
the CDL holder will be disqualified for one year; a lifetime disqualification may be
imposed for a second conviction

-- 49 of 151 --

50
Crash Risk
There is a clear relationship between drinking and driving crashes You can see
from the following chart that as the blood alcohol concentration goes up, the
chance of being involved in a crash increases The increased crash risk begins
before drivers are impaired or intoxicated
If You Drink, When Can You Drive
Alcohol reduces all of the important skills you need to drive safely. Alcohol goes from
your stomach into your blood and to all parts of your body. It reaches your brain in
20 to 40 minutes. Alcohol affects those areas of your brain that control judgment
and skill This is one reason why drinking alcohol is so dangerous; it affects your
judgment Good judgment is important to driving, but in this case, judgment helps
you to know when to stop drinking. In a way, it’s like alcohol puts good judgment on
hold. You do not know when you have had too much to drink until it is too late. It is
a little like a sunburn; by the time you feel it, it is already too late
Alcohol slows your reflexes and reaction time, reduces your ability to see clearly,
and makes you less alert. As the amount of alcohol in your body increases,
your judgment worsens and your skills decrease You will have trouble judging
distances, speeds, and the movement of other vehicles You will also have trouble
controlling your vehicle
The best advice is: if you drink alcohol, do not drive Even one drink of alcohol can
affect your driving With two or more drinks in your bloodstream you are impaired
and could be arrested
An alcohol drink is 1.5 oz. of 80-proof liquor (one shot glass) straight or with a
mixer, 12 oz. of beer (a regular size can, bottle, mug or glass) or a 5 oz. glass of
wine. Specialty drinks can have more alcohol in them and are the same as having
several normal drinks

-- 50 of 151 --

51
51
SECTION TWO
1.5 oz. Shot 	5 oz. Glass 	12 oz. Can
of 80 proof liquor 	of table wine 	of regular beer
There is no way to sober up quickly. Coffee, fresh air, exercise, or cold showers will
not help Time is the only thing that will sober you up
There are ways of dealing with social drinking situations. Arrange to go with two
or more persons and agree which one of you will not drink alcohol You can rotate
among the group, with one person being a “designated driver.” You can use public
transportation or use a cab, if available
There are ways to slow down the effect of drinking alcohol The best is to increase
the amount of time between drinks. Another is to eat before and while you are
drinking. Food slows down how fast alcohol gets into your blood. Starchy foods like
potato chips, pretzels, bread, and crackers are best. Remember, food only slows
when the alcohol gets into your blood, it will not keep you from getting drunk
Drugs Combined With Alcohol
Besides alcohol, there are many other drugs that can affect a person’s ability to
drive safely These drugs can have effects like those of alcohol or even worse This
is true of many prescription drugs and even many of the drugs you can buy without
a prescription Drugs taken for headaches, colds, hay fever or other allergies, or
those to calm nerves can make a person drowsy and affect their driving Pep pills,
“uppers,” and diet pills can make a driver feel more alert for a short time. Later
however, they can cause a person to be nervous, dizzy, unable to concentrate,
and they can affect your vision. Other prescription drugs can affect your reflexes,
judgment, vision, and alertness in ways similar to alcohol
If you are driving, check the label for warnings about the drug’s effect before you
take the drug. If you are not sure it is safe to take the drug and drive, ask your
doctor or pharmacist about any side effects
Never drink alcohol while you are taking other drugs. These drugs could intensify
the effects of alcohol or have additional effects of their own These effects not only
reduce your ability to be a safe driver but could cause serious health problems,
even death
Illegal drugs are not good for your health and affect your ability to be a safe
driver. For example, studies have shown that people who use marijuana make
more mistakes, have more trouble adjusting to glare, and get arrested for traffic
violations more than other drivers
Distracted Driving
Driving is a risky activity. In 2020, 42,060 people were killed in motor vehicle crashes
and over three million were injured. If you drink alcohol, even a little, your chances
of being in a crash are much greater than if you did not drink any alcohol Note:
Injury estimates are currently unavailable from National Highway Transportation

-- 51 of 151 --

52
Administration (NHTSA). Driving instructors estimate that a driver makes 200
decisions for every mile of driving. If you are doing anything else while driving,
you are adding to the total workload in your brain. If you take your eyes off the
road while traveling 55 mph for 3-4 seconds, your vehicle travels the length of an
entire football field.
Seven percent of all drivers 15-19 years old involved in fatal crashes were reported
as distracted
If you are doing any of the following while driving, you may be doing more things
than you can manage safely:
• Eating, drinking, or smoking
• Changing the radio, CD, or music on your electronic device
• Shaving, putting on make-up, or other personal grooming tasks.
• Engaging in intense, complicated emotional conversations on cell
phone or with passengers
• Reading a road map, newspaper, or taking notes.
• Focusing attention on children or pets.
• Retrieving unsecured cargo or objects.
• Driving an unfamiliar vehicle without first adjusting the mirrors and
seat, selecting entertainment options, and locating the lights, turn
signals, and windshield wipers
• Talking or texting using a cell phone
• Reading or responding to email or other communications via laptop,
electronic devices, or other PDA devices.
• Taking a selfie.
Drowsy Driving
Over the last decade, more than 7,000 people have been killed in drowsy-driving
related crashes Driving for long distances may make you drowsy or unaware of
what is happening. “Highway Hypnosis” commonly refers to the state of being
unaware of surroundings. It is caused by monotony—the sound of the wind, the
tires, and the steady hum of the engine
If you are tired while driving, it is best to rest or change drivers. Being tired dulls
your mind and slows down your reactions, making driving hazardous. Keep in
mind that lives are at stake
Here are some signs of drowsy drivers:
• Your eyes close or go out
of focus by themselves
• You have trouble keeping
your head up
• You can’t stop yawning
• You have wandering,
disconnected thoughts
• You don’t remember
driving the last few miles
• You missed your exit
• You keep driving out of
your lane
• Your speed becomes
variable

-- 52 of 151 --

53
53
SECTION TWO
DELAWARE DRINKING AND DRIVING LAWS
Drinking While Driving Is Prohibited
It is unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages while driving a motor vehicle upon
the highways of this State.
Driving Under The Influence (DUI)
Delaware motor vehicle laws concerning the arrest and disposition of driving while
under the influence violations provide that:
It applies to anyone who drives, operates, or has actual physical control of a vehicle,
off-highway vehicle, or moped while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
A person is subject to the DUI law both upon highways and elsewhere throughout the
state. The fact that a person charged with violating the DUI law is, or has been, legally
entitled to use alcohol or a drug shall not be considered a defense. All such persons,
by so doing, shall be deemed to have given their consent to a chemical test or tests
of breath, blood, and/or urine for the purpose of determining the presence of alcohol
and/or drugs. A person who drives under the influence of alcohol or drugs is subject
to both criminal and administrative penalties. A person convicted of a DUI in another
state will have their driver license revoked in Delaware
Implied Consent Law
Anyone arrested for driving, operating, or having actual physical control of a vehicle,
an off-highway vehicle, or a moped, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or of any drug shall be deemed to have given consent to submit to a chemical
test or tests or their breath, blood, and/or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol content in their blood. If the person refuses to submit to the test designated
by the officer, reasonable steps can be taken to conduct tests without the person’s
consent. Upon such refusal the arresting officer will deliver a report of refusal to
the Division of Motor Vehicles who may revoke the person’s driver license and/or
driving privilege for one to two years depending on the number of previous DUI
offenses, probable cause, and/or chemical test refusal offenses.
Law Pertaining To Juveniles Driving While Under The Influence
For a violation of the Delaware DUI law, the Family Court must submit an order to
the Division of Motor Vehicles to revoke the license and/or driving privilege of any
juvenile until such time as they are legally permitted to drink alcoholic beverages
(21 years old).
Zero Tolerance Law
The law states that anyone under the age of 21 years, who drives, operates, or
has actual physical control of a vehicle, an off-highway vehicle, or a moped while
consuming or after having consumed alcoholic beverages, shall have their driver
license revoked for a period of two months for the first offense and not less than
six months nor more than 12 months for each subsequent offense.
Underage Consumption Or Possession
Anyone under the age of 21 years who has alcoholic liquor in their possession
at any time, or consumes, or is found to have consumed alcoholic liquor, shall
be fined $100 for the 1st offense and not less than $200 nor more than $500
for each subsequent offense. A first and second violation of this subsection is
a civil offense. Information concerning this civil offense may not appear on an
individual’s certified criminal record This section shall not apply to the possession

-- 53 of 151 --

54
or consumption of alcoholic liquor in connection with any religious service or by
members of the same family within the private home of any of said members
Other Factors to be considered before you drink/drug and drive are:
• The expense and hardship to your family
• Your employment may be jeopardized
• Your insurance rates will significantly increase.
• DMV Penalties set forth in Title 21, Section 4177A of the Delaware Code.
• Court Penalties set forth in Title 21, Section 4177(d) of the Delaware Code.
Delaware Specific Penalties And Procedures
The driver license will be confiscated by the police officer at the time of the
arrest with the exception of Out of State driver license holders. The officer will
then issue a 15-day temporary license. The driver will have 15 days to request
an administrative hearing. Hearings may be requested in writing, by mail, fax
302-739-2602, online at dmv.de.gov, or in person at your local DMV facility. The
temporary license may be extended at that time, if eligible The license will be
revoked at the end of the 15-day period if no hearing is requested.
If requested by the driver, the Motor Vehicle Administrative Hearing will be held
to determine:
1. Whether a police officer had probable cause to believe that the
driver was driving, operating, or had actual physical control of a
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
2 Whether by a preponderance of evidence it appears that the driver
was driving, operating, or had actual physical control of a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. A chemical test
of .08 BAC or greater, or the presence of any drug is conclusive
evidence that the driver was under the influence.
3 Whether the driver refused a chemical test after being informed of
the revocation penalty for refusing such test
If the driver receives an unfavorable ruling at an administrative hearing, the driver
license and/or driving privilege will be revoked for:
Probable cause 	Refused chemical test
• 3 months for 1st offense 	• 12 months for 1st offense
• 12 months for 2nd offense 	• 18 months for 2nd offense
• 18 months for 3rd offense or more • 24 months for 3rd or more offense

-- 54 of 151 --

55
55
SECTION TWO
Any person revoked for a probable cause or refused chemical action may apply for
reinstatement of their driver license and/or driving privilege under the following terms:
1. Satisfactory completion in a course of instruction and/or program of
rehabilitation as designated by an alcohol evaluation Payment of all
fees associated with the course, program, and evaluation
2 The period of revocation has been served
3. You may be required to pass a vision screening, knowledge test, and
road skills test prior to your reinstatement
4 Payment of the $200 00 reinstatement fee
Driving Under The Influence (DUI) Penalties For A First Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 12 months for BAC less than .15 or for drugs.
• 18 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 24 months for BAC .20 or greater or refusal to submit to a chemical test.
Sanctions by Court
• Fine: $500.00 to $1,500.00 and/or
• Sentence: Imprisonment for up to 12 months.
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Program for First Offense Election (FOE)
A person who, in lieu of standing trial, enters a First Offender Election (FOE) may
seek an IID license to drive a motor vehicle before their period of revocation has
elapsed. All FOE’s offenders with a DUI violation date on or after February 2, 2015,
are immediately eligible to apply for the IID license under the following terms:
1. Your Delaware license has been turned in to the Division of Motor Vehicles.
2. Complete an IID program application.
3. Provide proof of insurance for the vehicle(s) on which the IID is to be installed.
4. Provide proof of a valid Delaware registered vehicle(s) on which the
IID is to be installed.
5. Your driver license and/or driving privilege is not suspended,
revoked, disqualified, or denied for another violation that would
prohibit the issuance of an IID license.
6. Once all requirements are met, the DMV will authorize installation of
the device on the approved vehicle(s).
Any person who elects the FOE program with the IID license, must remain
on the IID for four months from the date the IID license was issued. Prior to
reinstatement, the Division must have received a satisfactory alcohol program
completion report. A fee in the amount of $200.00 must be paid to the Division

-- 55 of 151 --

56
at the time of reinstatement, and an eye screening,
law test, and road test may be required. The
Division will then authorize the removal of the IID.
Any person who elects the FOE program but does
not have a vehicle in their name and chooses
not to get an IID license, will be ineligible for
reinstatement until the full period of revocation has
elapsed. All other requirements must be met prior
to reinstatement to include no driving during the
period of revocation. For more information see Title
21, Section 4177B of the Delaware Code.
DUI Penalties For Second Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 18 months for BAC less than .15 or drugs.
• 24 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 30 months for BAC .20 or greater, or refusal
to submit to a chemical test
Sanctions by Court
• Fine: $750.00 to $2,500.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment for a minimum of 60 days and up to 18
months. If offender satisfies eligibility criteria and participate
in the Court of Common Pleas DUI Treatment Program, the
Court may suspend the minimum sentence upon successful
completion of the program
DUI Penalties For Third Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 24 months for BAC less than .15 or drugs.
• 30 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 36 months for BAC .20 or greater, or refusal to submit to a
chemical test
Sanctions by Court
• Third DUI Offense: Class G Felony– occurring any time after
two prior offenses
• Fine: Up to $5,000.00 and.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than one year nor more than
two years
DUI Penalties For Fourth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all fourth offense convictions
Sanctions by Court
• Fourth DUI Offense: Class E Felony – occurring any time after
three prior offenses
• Fine: Up to $7,000.00.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than two years nor more
than five years.
DUI Penalties For Fifth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all fifth offense convictions.

-- 56 of 151 --

57
57
SECTION TWO
Sanctions by Court
• Fifth DUI Offense: Class E Felony.
• Fine: Up to $10,000.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than three years nor more
than five years.
DUI Penalties For Sixth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all sixth offense convictions
Sanctions by Court
• Sixth DUI Offense: Class D Felony.
• Fine: Up to $10,000.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than four years nor more
than eight years
DUI Penalties For Seventh Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all seventh or greater offense convictions
Sanctions by Court
• Seventh or greater DUI Offense: Class C Felony.
• Fine: Up to $15,000.00.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than five years nor more
than fifteen years.
Ignition Interlock Device Program (IID)
An IID license authorizes the holder to operate a vehicle that has an IID installed. An
IID license cannot be issued until the participant has met all minimum qualifications. All
DUI offenders are eligible to apply for the IID after a minimum mandated revocation
period has been completed. Per Title 21, Section 4177C(a)-(c) of the Delaware Code:
1. 	FOE - immediately eligible upon entry into program;
2. 	First Offense Conviction, non FOE - 30 to 45 days depending on BAC;
3. 	Second Offense Conviction – 60 days;
4 	Third Offense Conviction – 90 days;
5. 	Fourth and Subsequent Conviction – 6 months.
The IID license is not available for CDL class vehicles or valid for any peripheral
endorsements. The offense in question must not have involved death or serious injury
to any person (see Title 21, Section 2732(a) of the Delaware Code). The offender’s
driver license and/or driving privilege is not suspended, revoked, disqualified, or
denied for another violation that would prohibit the issuance of an IID license and
other disqualification criteria as set forth in Title 21, Section 4177G(f), 4177C, or other
criteria set forth elsewhere in Delaware Code or Administrative Code.
An individual that is not otherwise disqualified may apply to obtain an IID license
by following the general process below:
1 	You must have had a valid Delaware license at the time of the
offense in question;
2. 	Complete an IID application;
3. 	The Division of Motor Vehicles verifies proof of enrollment in
a course of instruction and/or program of rehabilitation as
designated by the alcohol evaluation and pay all fees associated

-- 57 of 151 --

58
with the course/program;
4 	Your current issued Delaware license has been surrendered to the
Division of Motor Vehicles;
5. 	Provide proof of insurance for the vehicle(s) on which the IID is to
be installed;
6. 	Provide proof of a valid Delaware registered vehicle(s) on which
the IID is to be installed. An IID shall be installed on each vehicle(s)
the person will operate during the period of revocation, regardless
of whether the vehicle is owned by the person;
7. 	You may be required to pass a vision screening, knowledge test,
and road skills test prior to issuance of an IID license;
8. 	Once all requirements are met the Division of Motor Vehicles will
authorize an approved IID Vendor to install the device(s) on the
approved vehicle(s);
9. 	Upon proof of installation of the IID, the Division will verify all criteria
have been met and is authorized to issue an IID license (i.e. reinstatement
of limited driving privileges linked to approved vehicle(s)).
If a DUI offender chooses to obtain the IID license, they must have the IID installed
on any vehicle(s) the person will or does operate, the offender incurs all costs
associated with the program, and must have the device on the vehicle(s) for
the entire period required for the IID, regardless of when the original revocation
period would otherwise elapse. The IID time requirement runs from the date of
IID license issuance. Per Title 21, Section 4177C(d) of the Delaware Code the time
periods are below
1. 	FOE - 4 months;
2. 	First Offense Conviction, non FOE -12 to 23 months depending on BAC;
3. 	Second Offense Conviction – 16 to 28 months depending on BAC;
4. 	Third Offense Conviction – 21 to 33 months depending on BAC;
5. 	Fourth and Subsequent Conviction – at least 54 months.
The Division may extend the above time periods
or disqualify a participant from the program
for non-compliance with requirements.
See Title 21, Section 4177G(f) of the Delaware
Code
If a DUI offender does not apply for the IID
Program, they must serve the entire revocation
associated with their DUI violation and may not
drive during this period
For further information regarding the IID
program, please contact the IID Unit at 302-
744-2540
58

-- 58 of 151 --

59
SECTION THREE
SECTION THREE
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, TITLES,
REGISTRATION, AND INSURANCE
Delaware law requires the registration of all vehicles operated on the highway. This
section describes the title/registration process. New residents must title/register
their vehicles within 60 days after moving to Delaware Customers may obtain
more detailed information on titling, registration, inspection, and other services at
the Division of Motor Vehicles’ website at dmv.de.gov
MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Required Equipment
Every automobile registered in Delaware must have the following equipment.
Prohibited equipment is discussed in the next subsection.
• Headlights - At least two white multiple beam lights are required,
one on each side in the front. High beams must be aimed and strong
enough to reveal persons and vehicles at least 350 feet ahead
Low beams must reveal people at least 100 feet ahead and must
be so adjusted as not to strike the eyes of an approaching driver
Headlights must be on when windshield wipers are in use due to
inclement weather
• Taillights - At least two, original design, red lights are required on
the rear They must be visible from a distance of 500 feet
• Parking Lights - At least one white or amber light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front and at least one red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. Rear light(s) may be same as
taillight(s).
• License Plate Light - Must be white and strong enough for the
number on the registration plate to be seen from a distance of
50 feet Must illuminate registration plate without projecting light
towards vehicles traveling in the same direction
• Stop Lights - Original design amber or red light (or any color
between red and amber) is required on rear. It must light when the
brake pedal is pushed and be visible from a distance of at least 100
feet in normal sunlight. If vehicle is equipped with two stop lights,
both must be in working order
• Turn Signals - All vehicles manufactured after 1953 must be equipped
with two turn signals in front and two in rear Those in front may be
any shade between white and amber; those in rear may be any shade
between amber and red Both sets must be visible at least 100 feet
in normal sunlight. Vehicles manufactured prior to 1953, or in 1953,
equipped with turn signals must have them in working order.
• Reflectors - All passenger vehicles manufactured after 1953 require
two red reflectors to the rear. Vehicles manufactured after 1977
require a minimum of six reflectors, two amber on the front sides,
two red on the rear sides and two red to the rear of the vehicle
Reflectors must be visible to 500 feet and have four square inches
of reflective area. Reflectors may be incorporated in light lenses.
For trailers and motorcycles refer to FMVSS 108 or contact a DMV
inspection facility

-- 59 of 151 --

60
• Marker Lights - All passenger vehicles manufactured since 1972
require side marker lamps. Lamps must be visible to 500 feet and
have four square inches of luminous lens area consisting of two
amber lamps to the front sides and two red lamps to the rear sides
For trailers and motorcycles refer to FMVSS 108 or contact a DMV
inspection facility
• Brakes - Brakes must be adjusted to work evenly on all sides of the
vehicle and meet federal braking requirements.
• Parking or Emergency Brake - Must stop vehicle within a distance of
54 feet from a speed of 20 mph
• Windshield and Windows - Windshield and all side and rear windows
must be made of automotive safety glass. No stickers or signs shall
be placed on windshield or other windows other than certificates
required by law or those approved by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
• Windshield Wipers - Are required to clean rain, snow, or other
moisture from windshield
• Rear Vision Mirror - Must be placed so that the driver can see any
vehicle traveling in the same direction. If the view from the inside
mirror to the rear is blocked, the vehicle must have outside mirrors
on the left and right side of the vehicle
• Muffler - All vehicles must be equipped with a muffler which must
be in good working order and in constant operation. Federal noise
standards must be met. Loud or excessive noise is not permitted.
• Horn - Must be able to make sound that can be heard under normal
conditions at least 200 feet away
• Seat Belts - Must be installed for all front seat occupants, in passenger
cars manufactured after January 1, 1968, and trucks, buses, and multi-
passenger vehicles manufactured after July 1, 1971.
Additional Equipment
• Spotlights - Two may be mounted. No part of the intense beam shall
be aimed to left of nor more than 100 feet ahead of vehicle
• Fog Lights - Two (white or yellow) may be mounted on front of
vehicle at a height of not less than 12 inches nor more than 30 inches
above the ground. Light beam must drop at least four inches in first
25 feet
• Back-up Lights - May be mounted on rear of vehicle to project light
for backing These may be any color from white to amber
• Colored Lights - Other than factory-equipped, marker lamps and
turn signal lamps, no colored lights are permitted on the vehicle
Such lights are permitted only on emergency vehicles.
Prohibited Equipment
• Limitation in Number of Lights - Not more than four lights of 300
candlepower or more on the front of a vehicle shall be lit at one time
Headlights must be installed no higher than 54 inches nor less than
24 inches from the center of the lamp to the ground
• Red Lights Prohibited in Front - No ordinary motor vehicle can show
a red light visible to the front of such vehicle. Such lights are permitted
only on emergency vehicles

-- 60 of 151 --

61
SECTION THREE
• Flashing Lights Prohibited - Flashing lights are generally prohibited
except on:
• Emergency vehicles, school buses, snow removal equipment
(can be green revolving or flashing lights).
• Any vehicle as a means of indicating right or left turns.
• Any vehicle as a means of indicating a traffic hazard (four-
way flashers).
• License Plate Additions - Unauthorized plates, frames, accessories,
designs, or symbols on or attached to the license plate are prohibited
• Other Lights and Original Design Change - No light, lamp or
reflector that tends to change the original design or performance of
the vehicle may be installed
• Studded Tires - Are legal from October 15 to April 15 inclusive; illegal
from April 16 to October 14 inclusive. Other states have different time
periods when studded tires are permitted; a few states do not allow
their use at any time You must abide by their laws when passing
through those states
• Cut-outs - It is prohibited to use a muffler cut-out.
• Noise Devices - No ordinary vehicle shall be equipped with any siren,
exhaust, or compression whistle
• Towed Vehicle - No motor vehicle shall tow more than a single
vehicle (a tractor and semi-trailer may tow one other vehicle). The
draw bar or other connection between any two vehicles, one of
which is towing the other, must be no more than 15 feet long. If a
chain, rope or cable is used, a red flag at least 12 inches square must
be attached to it
• Tinted Windows - Window tint is prohibited on the front windshield
below the top five inches of the windshield (specifically not below the
AS-1 masking on the windshield), and on the left and right driver side
windows Tint material also may not be installed over any lights or the
vehicle’s license plate. Vehicles with tint installed must have outside
mirrors on both the right and left sides of the vehicle. Vehicles that
have aftermarket tint to the immediate right or left of the driver must
have an approved valid tint waiver, and it must be kept inside the
vehicle at all times. Tint Waivers can be applied for online at https://
dmv.de.gov/OnlineServices/medical-tint-waiver/.
• Lift Kits - Refer to Delaware Code, Title 21, Section 4318, for bumper,
frame rail, and body heights
Using Headlights
Delaware law requires your headlights (not parking lights) to be:
• On when driving after sunset or before sunrise
• On any other time you cannot see beyond 1000 feet
• On any time you use your windshield wipers
• Switched to low beams 500 feet before meeting another vehicle or
when within 200 feet of the vehicle you are following

-- 61 of 151 --

62
Using Safety Belts And Child Restrains
Delaware law requires all occupants of a vehicle to be properly restrained in a
seatbelt or child safety seat. Officers may pull over a vehicle if they see unbuckled
occupants inside The driver of the vehicle receives a ticket for any unrestrained or
improperly restrained vehicle occupants Please review the important information
on the use of safety belts and child restraints in the Driving Skills and Safety Tips
section of this manual
HOW TO TITLE/REGISTER YOUR VEHICLE
New residents must title/register their vehicles within 60 days after becoming a
Delaware resident. State law requires changes of address to be reported to the
Division of Motor Vehicles within 30 days. You can find more detailed information
on titling/registering a vehicle under the Division’s website at: dmv.de.gov, then
click on “Vehicle Services.”
Step 1 – Liability Insurance, Financial Responsibility And Penalty
The first step in obtaining a Delaware vehicle title/registration is to establish
your (the owner(s)) financial responsibility. This is done by purchasing a liability
insurance policy from a company licensed by the Insurance Commissioner to
operate in Delaware The minimum coverage is:
• A PIP (Personal Injury Protection) minimum of $15,000 for any 1
person and $30,000 for all persons injured in any 1 crash
• $25,000 for bodily injury or death of one person in any one crash
• $50,000 for bodily injury or death of two or more persons in any one crash
• $10,000 for injury to, or destruction of, property of others in any one crash
The Division requires verification that the car to be registered is properly insured.
One of the following documents is acceptable:
• An original Delaware Insurance Identification Card – All insurance
companies are required to issue such cards. The card must be carried
in the vehicle at all times and include the period of coverage and the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) company
identification number (NAIC code). The ID card must have a valid
expiration date. ID cards are re-issued every six months. The card
may be paper or electronic
• A valid insurance policy.
• A written binder within 30 days of issue from an insurance company
or agent on the insurance company’s letterhead
• Faxed insurance is acceptable if it is sent directly from the insurance
company to the DMV only.
Please Note: Electronic proof of insurance will be verified. Third party faxes will
not be accepted
The penalty for operating an uninsured vehicle is a fine not less than $1,500.00 nor
more than $2,000.00 and mandatory suspension of driver license and/or driving
privileges for six months. For each subsequent offense occurring within three years of
a former offense, the fine shall be not less than $3,000.00 nor more than $4,000.00.
Providing false proof of insurance will result in an additional fine of $500.00 and/
or 30 days in jail

-- 62 of 151 --

63
SECTION THREE
Specialized personnel with the State Department of Insurance and/or law enforcement
officials may confiscate the registration plate of a vehicle absent affirmative proof a
vehicle is insured, after proper notice has been sent to the assigned owner
OWNERS CANCELLING INSURANCE FOR ANY REASON MUST FIRST SURRENDER
THEIR VALID LICENSE PLATE TO THE DIVISION. FAILURE TO SURRENDER A VALID
LICENSE PLATE PRIOR TO INSURANCE CANCELLATION WILL RESULT IN FINES.
The Division of Motor Vehicles randomly audits for proof of insurance on active
registrations The penalty for being uninsured is $100 00 for 1-30 days and an
additional $5 00 per day until insurance is obtained, tags are surrendered, or the
registration expires. In addition, suspensions are imposed on the registration of all
owners who fail to respond to the request. Once suspended, reinstatement fees
are $50 00 per registration
Step 2 – Vehicle Inspection
The second step in obtaining a Delaware vehicle title/
registration is to have your motor vehicle inspected
at any of the four DMV locations. The inspection lane
manual is available at dmv.de.gov
A check of the following items is recommended
before your vehicle is presented for inspection; it
may save you a return trip for re-inspection This list
is not all of the items inspected but are those items
which commonly fail inspection
• Certificate of title or registration card must be
presented
• There is no charge for an inspection for
Delaware residents
• All lights must be clean, in working order, and properly aimed. This
includes stop lights, turn signals, license plate light, parking lights,
and headlights
• Brakes must stop the vehicle within required distances. A performance
brake test is given to all vehicles presented for inspection
• Mirrors must be clean and unbroken
• Windshield wipers must be fully operative (the rubber blades must
be in good condition).
• Hood and trunk latches must hold hood and trunk fully closed.
• Tires must have no bulges, no fabric showing, no bald areas, and
no cuts. Tread depth must be at least 2/32 inch measured in two
adjacent treads
• Door handles or equivalent must be present and in working condition.
• There must be no damaged or dislocated parts projecting from the
vehicle that could present a safety hazard
• Horn must be in operating condition.
• Muffler must effectively reduce the sound of engine exhaust. No
leaks in the exhaust system. A catalytic converter must be installed
if originally equipped by the manufacturer.
• There must be no visible gasoline, oil, or coolant leaks

-- 63 of 151 --

64
• Seat belts must be worn.
• Bumper height on passenger cars must not exceed 22 inches from
the ground to the bottom of the bumper The maximum distance
between the vehicle body and vehicle frame rail may not exceed
three inches
• No tinting or sun-screening device may be applied to the front
windshield or to the front side windows
• No air scoops shall be mounted on a vehicle hood that exceeds three inches.
• All vehicles 1968 to 1995, will be tested for exhaust emissions. 1996
gas-powered and 1997 disel-powered, and newer vehicles will be
tested using the Onboard Diagnostic Test (OBD-II).
• Windshield must be free of cracks, holes, or breaks. Cracks over five
inches or star chips over one inch are mandatory failure items The
minimum height of visibility of a windshield is 10 inches
• Seven-year-old models (and newer) vehicles no longer require
inspection, except for a VIN inspection on vehicles that have never
been titled in Delaware. Vehicles seven years old receive one-year
renewals without inspection; all others receive a three-, four- or five-
year renewal based on model year
• A late fee of $20.00 is assessed for renewal after vehicle registration
expiration
• DMV accepts cash, check, money order, and credit card payments
from Visa, American Express, Discover, MasterCard, Google Pay and
Apple Pay with proper identification.
POOR CONDITION OF ANY EQUIPMENT ITEMS MAY BE CAUSE FOR REJECTION.
Vehicles in unsafe condition, lacking required equipment, or not in proper repair
or adjustment will be rejected The inspection technician will provide an inspection
report showing the rejected items These items must be corrected and the vehicle
re-inspected and passed prior to the issuance of a title, registration card, and
plate. Vehicle owners whose registration is about to expire may be eligible for a
temporary tag if the failure item is not safety-related The cost is $20 00
Step 3 – Title
The third step in obtaining a vehicle registration is to complete an application for
a Delaware title and registration
If the vehicle is coming from a state that issues certificates of title, a certificate
of title must be surrendered to the Division of Motor Vehicles at the time the
application is filed. If there is a lien or encumbrance against the vehicle, the
Division will provide a form letter (MV-35) to send to the lienholder to obtain the
certificate of title.
Applications (MV-212) for certificate of title and the Vehicle Inspection Report are
issued by an inspection technician after your vehicle passes the emissions tests
and safety inspection The application must be signed by all owners of the vehicle
or by someone with an original power of attorney to sign for such owner(s), or by
an officer of the company (owner, president, vice president, secretary or treasurer)
owning the vehicle. (Power of attorney must be notarized.)

-- 64 of 151 --

65
SECTION THREE
Whenever a motor vehicle is brought into Delaware from another state and a title/
registration is sought, the owner must pay a vehicle document fee of 4 25 percent
of the value of the vehicle but not less than $8 00 unless the owner presents proof
that they has paid to such other state a sales tax, transfer tax, or some similar
levy on the purchase of the vehicle within ninety (90) days prior to registering in
Delaware. The value of the vehicle shall be the current NADA Average Trade-in
book value. Note: the document fee for mobile homes is 3.75%.
Proof of Liability Insurance must be submitted at the time of titling/registering a
vehicle. (See paragraph regarding liability insurance.)
The title fee is $35 00 if there is no lien or $55 00 if there is a lien against the vehicle
If there is a lien against the vehicle, the title is mailed to the lien holder (customer
must provide the correct address for lien holder).
The registration fee is $40 00 for one year or $80 00 for two years for all
passenger vehicles You have the option to register for one or two years The
Division recommends that you renew your registration for two years. Vehicles in
the first seven model years may register for one to seven years depending on the
model year. Registration fee for six months is $21.00.
Registration fees for commercial vehicles are $40.00 for first 5,000 pounds with
increments of $18 00 per 1,000 pounds above 5,000 pounds Trailer fees are $15 00
per year for 1,000 pounds, $20 00 per year for 1,001 pounds to 2,000 pounds and
$40 00 per year for 2,001 pounds to 5,000 pounds with increments of $18 00 per
1,000 pounds above 5,000 pounds. Recreational Vehicle and Recreational Trailer
fees are $40.00 per year for first 5,000 pounds with increments of $6.40 per
1,000 pounds above 5,000 pounds
Upon submission of all necessary documents and their acceptance, and payment
of the vehicle document fee, title fee, and registration fee, a certificate of title,
registration card, and license plate will be issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
If there is a lien against the vehicle, the title is mailed to the lienholder.
DMV accepts cash, check, money order and credit card payments from Visa,
American Express, Discover, Mastercard, Google Pay and Apple pay with proper
identification .
Requirement For Applicants Under 18 Years Of Age
If you are less than 18 years of age, your application for a certificate of title must be
signed by your father, mother, guardian, or court-appointed custodian (with legal
documentation) granting consent to the application.
Renewing Registration
Prior to registration renewal you must present proof that the vehicle is covered by
adequate liability insurance and have passed the State’s vehicle safety inspection
and emission test You may have your vehicle inspected any time 90 days prior to
the expiration date of the registration. (If your registration expires on June 30th, you
may have your vehicle inspected anytime after April 1st.) No time is lost by renewing
early You may also renew your registration at that time or you may renew any time
up to the expiration date. It is suggested that you avoid the waiting lines normally
experienced on the 15th and last few days of each month by presenting your vehicle
for inspection early in the month Expiration date is indicated on your sticker and
registration card. A late fee of $20.00 is charged for late renewals (except active
duty military personnel; see fee chart for details). Trailers weighing 4,000 pounds

-- 65 of 151 --

66
or less do not require re-inspection prior to renewal of the registration. Certain
vehicles will be eligible for mail-in renewal. Eligible owners will be notified by mail,
email or phone 90 days prior to the vehicle’s registration expiration date Please be
sure the DMV has your updated mailing address, email address and phone number
for renewal reminders
Change Of Address
If you change your address within Delaware, you have thirty (30) days in which to
notify both the Vehicle Services and Driver License Sections of the DMV. Vehicle
Registration address changes may be submitted online at dmv.de.gov Once
you update your address, you will need a printer to print your new registration
card. Address changes can also be done by writing to Vehicle Services Helpdesk,
PO Box 698, Dover DE 19903. When requesting an address change in writing,
please include your vehicle registration number (license plate number) and your
new address. DMV will mail your new registration card for no fee. (See the Driver
License Information section for changing address on your driver license.)
Change Of Name
If you change your name, you have thirty (30) days in which to apply for a new registration
card and title This name change must be completed on your driver license prior to
making the change on the title and registration. This may be done by visiting an office
of the Division. You must also present the certificate of title, the old registration, proof of
insurance, and the marriage certificate or court order as evidence of name change. The
Division will issue you a new certificate of title and registration card for a fee of $35.00
or $55.00 if there is a lien. (See Driver License section for information on changing your
name on your license.)
Out-Of-State Inspections
Delaware residents who are temporarily residing more than 200 miles out of state may
renew their registration by mail. Such residents include military personnel and college
students. An out-of-state inspection form MV210, can be obtained on the website
at dmv.de.gov. Information on details may be obtained from the Division of Motor
Vehicles, Attn: Vehicle Services Helpdesk, P.O. Box 698, Dover, Delaware 19903.
Responsibility Of Owner
The registration certificate and proof of liability insurance must accompany the motor
vehicle whenever it is operated. The license plate (tag) must be affixed to the rear
of the vehicle in the designated position and must bear the sticker showing year and
month of expiration on the lower right corner of the plate Your registration expires at
midnight on the day of the month indicated on the sticker There is no grace period
66

-- 66 of 151 --

67
67
SECTION F OUR
SECTION FOUR
RULES OF THE ROAD
Right-Of-Way
Motor vehicle laws of Delaware and other states do not give anyone the right-of-
way The law describes who is to yield the right-of-way When you can prevent a
crash by yielding the right-of-way, regardless of who was supposed to yield, it is
of course the right thing to do!
Signals And Signs
Traffic signals and signs apply to every person walking, driving, or riding a bike on a street
or highway. Failing to heed a signal’s or sign’s message is a major cause of crashes.
Red Light Reinforcement Program
Delaware’s Red Light Reinforcement Program is the most up-to-date and effective
way of monitoring busy intersections for motorists who disobey traffic laws. The
program is designed to help change driver behavior by strategically positioning
traffic cameras and making Delaware intersections safer. Drivers who run red
lights are photographed, their vehicle tag numbers are recorded, and citations
are automatically sent via the U.S. Postal Service. If you have received a red light
citation but have lost it, or have questions about payment mailing address, legal
options, or viewing the video footage of the violation, please call 844-213-7033 or
go to http://www.deldot.gov/information/red_light/
Understanding Traffic Signals
Understanding complex signals is not difficult if you learn four simple rules:
Remember The Four Rules
1. RED — Stop
2. YELLOW — Prepare to stop
3. GREEN — Proceed with caution
4. Arrows apply to only the direction indicated
Traffic signals must be obeyed by all drivers and bike riders.
Steady Red Light
Stop. You must stop at the stop line, before the crosswalk, or before
entering the intersection should no stop line or crosswalk be present
Right turns on red are permissible after full stop, except when
prohibited by a posted sign or a steady red arrow is displayed. Left
turns on red are permissible after full stop from a one-way street to
another one-way street unless prohibited by a posted sign or a steady
red arrow is displayed Make turns with caution, when safe to do so

-- 67 of 151 --

68
Steady Yellow Light
This means that the signal is changing from green to red; prepare
to stop. If you are too close to stop safely, continue through the
intersection with care
Steady Green Light
Proceed with caution When it is safe to proceed, you may enter the
intersection to go straight ahead or turn unless a sign or additional
signal prohibits the turn You must yield to pedestrians and vehicles
already in the intersection or adjacent crosswalk When you turn,
you must be especially careful of pedestrians and oncoming traffic.
Flashing Red Light
Flashing red light means the same as a stop sign. You must come to
a complete stop Proceed only when safe
Flashing Yellow Light
Flashing yellow light means slow down, be more aware, and
proceed with caution. Be careful of crossing intersection traffic,
controlled by a flashing red.
Dark Traffic Signals
In the event that traffic signals are in place and no lighted indication
is visible to an approaching driver, the approaching driver shall
reduce speed and prepare to yield to other vehicles that are in or
approaching the intersection

-- 68 of 151 --

69
69
SECTION F OUR
Arrows
The difference between round color lenses and arrows is that arrows apply only to
a specific direction, while round lenses apply to all directions. If you know the four
rules on the preceding page, the information provided below will be easy for you
Steady Red Arrow
A full stop is required when a steady red arrow is displayed. You
may not proceed in the direction of a steady red
Flashing Red Arrow
Turns are permitted in the direction of a flashing red arrow after
coming to a full stop The full stop enables drivers to select a safe
gap in the main flow of traffic, and then complete the turn without
waiting for a green signal. Signal may be followed by a steady red
arrow, steady yellow arrow or solid red ball
Steady Yellow Arrow
A green arrow display has ended. If you are too close to stop safely,
continue thru the intersection with care
Flashing Yellow Arrow
The movement in the indicated direction is permitted after yielding
to opposing traffic and pedestrians.
Steady Green Arrow
Proceed with caution in the direction the arrow points. Remember
that you must yield to all pedestrians and vehicles already lawfully
in the intersection

-- 69 of 151 --

70
Let’s try the four rules on some complex signals and see if it really is easy.
Thru traffic and, if not otherwise prohibited, left and right turns
may proceed when safe Exercise special care when making turns,
especially left turns across oncoming opposite traffic.
Left turns and thru traffic and, if not otherwise prohibited, right
turns may proceed, when safe
This is the change interval between the two displays above. It
means that the green arrow interval has ended. If you are too close
to the intersection to stop safely, complete your turn with care
Here the green light for the thru and right turn has ended, but the
left turn continues to be green. Continue left turning if safe. Straight
thru and right- turning traffic should prepare to stop. If unable to
stop, proceed with great caution
Left turns may proceed, if safe, but all others must stop. Right-
turning traffic may turn after stopping, if safe and not otherwise
prohibited
Pedestrian Signals
At many intersections, pedestrian signals are used in combination with vehicular
traffic signals. Drivers must obey the vehicular traffic signals. Pedestrians must
obey the WALK and DON’T WALK signals or symbols.
The WALK signal means the pedestrian may proceed but needs to be alert for
vehicles turning right or left across the crosswalk. Drivers are required to yield to
pedestrians who have a “WALK” indicator.
The flashing DON’T WALK signal means that if the pedestrian has started to
cross the street, they should finish crossing as rapidly as possible. If they have not
started to cross, they should not start
The steady DON’T WALK signal means that the pedestrian should not start to
cross the street at all Delaware is installing new countdown pedestrian signals at
various intersections throughout the State. Here is a quick guide on how to use
pedestrian signals

-- 70 of 151 --

71
71
SECTION F OUR
Accessible Pedestrian Signals (APS)
An Accessible Pedestrian Signal (APS) is a device that is used in conjunction with
pedestrian signals that communicate pedestrian signal information in non-visual
formats such as audible tones, verbal messages, and/or vibrating surfaces. APS
lets pedestrians who are blind or visually impaired know when the WALK interval
begins and terminates Pedestrians who know when the crossing interval begins
will be able to legally start a crossing before turning cars enter the intersection
and can complete a crossing with less delay. Audible signals can also provide
directional guidance, which is particularly useful at non-perpendicular intersections
and at wide multi-lane crossings
High Intensity Activated Crosswalk (HAWK)
The HAWK signal is activated when a pedestrian presses
the crosswalk button, much like they do at a regular
crosswalk, which will activate the signal Once it is
activated, the signal will go through a series of stages
that will stop traffic long enough for pedestrians to safely
cross the roadway. Traffic will then be allowed to proceed
and the signal will reset itself until activated again
For further information on the responsibilities of pedestrians
and the responsibilities of drivers toward pedestrians, refer to
Pedestrians in the Other Highway Users part of this section.
Rectangular Rapid Flashing Beacon
A type of beacon that has proven effective in improving
motorists’ yielding rates at crosswalks is called a Rectangular
Rapid-Flashing Beacon. These beacons are mounted above or
below pedestrian and/or bicycle warning signs at crosswalks
and are activated via a push button by pedestrians or
bicyclists. They flash more rapidly and in a “stutter” pattern,
as opposed to the regular flash rate of most beacons. As a
motorist, when you see these beacons flashing, slow down,
look for pedestrians and bicyclists, and yield as necessary

-- 71 of 151 --

72
The stop sign is the only
8-sided sign you will
see on the highway. It’s
red with white letters
When you come to a
stop 	sign, 	you 	must
make a complete stop at the stop line;
or, if none, at the crosswalk; or if none,
before entering the intersection
Before starting you must yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian in or
approaching the intersection Be careful
to look for less visible vehicles such as
bicycles, mopeds, and motorcycles
You will see no other
sign of this shape on the
highway You must yield
the right-of-way to any
vehicle 	or 	pedestrian
in or approaching the
intersection, 	stopping 	if 	necessary
Having so yielded to any vehicle or
pedestrian, you shall not proceed until
such movement can be made in safety
Slow down as you approach a yield
sign. Look to left and right. Yield to
pedestrians and vehicles performing
lawful maneuvers or crossing
Used to regulate traffic,
this particular sign tells
you the speed limit for
the stretch of highway
where it is posted
These are some of the international signs
adopted in Delaware and the other 49
states. They mean “No Left Turn”, “No
Right Turn”, and “No U Turn.”
Bicycle Signals
Although not yet common in Delaware, there are some traffic signals
intended specifically for bicyclists, and more are planned in the future.
Bicycle signals may include traditional circular or arrow indicators that
are designated for bicyclists via an adjacent sign These signals have the
same meaning as regular circular or arrow indicators, but are applicable
only to bicyclists in designated bicycle lanes or paths. Alternately, there
are bicycle signal indicators that have the shape of a bicycle 	These
signals have the same meaning as circular signal indicators, but are only
applicable to bicyclists in designated bicycle lanes or paths 	Bicyclists
traveling in general travel lanes are to obey the regular circular and arrow traffic
signals described in previous sections
Highway Signs
Highway signs tell you about traffic rules, hazards, where you are, give directions,
and where services are located The shape and color of these signs give clues to
the type of information they provide You must know highway signs by their shape
and color, as well as by the words, numbers, or figures on them.
Regulatory Signs
Regulatory signs tell you of laws and regulations for traffic direction, lane use,
turning, speed, parking and other special situations. These signs are square,
rectangular, or have a special shape and are usually white, red or black with black,
red, white or green letters or symbols

-- 72 of 151 --

73
73
SECTION F OUR
Both signs carry the same
message Either may be
used
Where this sign is posted,
you must wait until the
signal turns green before
proceeding 	or 	making
turns
Watch out for and obey this
sign. Also look for double
solid lines on the highway
You must not enter the
street so marked. It may
be a one-way street in the
opposite direction or all
vehicular traffic may be
prohibited
No stopping, standing or
parking where posted
Reserved 	parking 	for
handicapped only
Overhead Lane Signals
You must obey the overhead sign in your lane
When the word “ONLY” is used, you must go in the
direction the arrow points; there is no option
Warning Signs
These signs are usually yellow with black lettering or symbols and most are
diamond shaped These signs warn you to slow down and be prepared to stop if
necessary. It warns you that a special situation or a hazard is ahead. Some common
warning signs are shown below
Five-sided sign black on yellow is used only to warn of schools and
school crossings. As you approach this sign, slow down and watch
out for children, stopping as necessary. New fluorescent yellow-green
signs may also be used
Round sign black on yellow is used as an advance warning that you
are approaching a highway–rail intersection When you come to this
sign, slow down and watch for the highway–rail intersection Use
particular caution at night to avoid driving into the side of a train
Other Warning Signs
Sharp turn to right.
Reduce speed.
Curve to right 	Sharp turn to the right
and then to left
Keep to the right of the
traffic island or divider.
With more complex traffic
patterns, signs such as this
may be used

-- 73 of 151 --

74
Winding road ahead
Adjust speed.
Reduced speed ahead. 	Side road enters
highway from right
Warning of yield sign
ahead. Slow down and
be prepared to stop
at yield sign or adjust
speed to traffic.
Bicycle warning
Watch left and right
for cyclists Used on
roads that are shared
with bicycles
Roadway narrows.
Slow down.
Approaching divided
highway. Keep to right
Divided highway ends
ahead
Without pavement –
road surface unknown
Slow down and check
vehicle control on
changed surface
Room for only one lane
of traffic. Slow down
and prepare to yield to
oncoming vehicles
Room for two lanes of
traffic but potentially
dangerous. Slow down
and watch out for
oncoming vehicles
Added lane, merging
not required, watch for
other vehicles changing
lanes
Steep hill ahead. Slow
down and be ready to shift
to lower gear to control
speed and save brakes
Roadway slippery when
wet. First half hour of
rain most hazardous
Two-way traffic, one-
way traffic ends and
reminder of oncoming
traffic.
Bump in road ahead
Adjust speed to avoid
loss of control
Merging traffic from
right just ahead
Warning of traffic
signals at intersection
ahead

-- 74 of 151 --

75
75
SECTION F OUR
Playground area,
numerous children
requiring caution.
Watch, children ahead 	Deer crossing, be alert
to deer on both sides
of the road
Roundabout sign;
reduce speed and yield
to pedestrians and
vehicles already in the
circle
Another road crosses
highway ahead Be
alert for cross traffic
and regulatory signs or
signals
Stop sign ahead.
Slow down and
prepare to stop before
turning
This sign is placed at the
intersection Yield right
of way or stop before
turning right or left
This is an advisory
speed sign. It is the
recommended speed
for its stretch of
highway Often posted
under other warning
signs
Farm machinery. Used on
roads that are shared by
farm vehicles Be alert and
prepare to slow down
Horse-drawn vehicle.
Used on the roads that are
shared by horse-drawn
vehicles Be alert and
prepare to slow down
“Zipper Merge” – The
late merge or zipper
method is a convention
for merging traffic into a
reduced number of lanes
Drivers in merging lanes
are expected to use both
lanes to advance to the
lane reduction point and
merge at the location,
alternating turns

-- 75 of 151 --

76
Guide Signs
Most guide signs are rectangular (four-sided) in
shape with white letters on a green background
The arrow points in the direction you should go to
reach the named place This sign is typical
United States numbered routes are marked with a
sign having black numbers on a white background of
the familiar U.S. Shield.
State routes are marked with a sign having black
letters on a white circular background
The interstate system has route markers in the shape of a shield The
top quarter carries the legend interstate in white letters on a red
background while the bottom three-quarters is blue with the route
number in large white letters
Information signs
Motorist service signs usually have white letters on a rectangular
blue background. (For example: gas, food, lodging.)
Recreation signs usually have white letters on a brown background.
(For example: state park.)
Beacons Supplementing Signs
Sometimes signs are supplemented with circular
flashing beacons to better grab motorists’ attention,
to emphasize the critical nature of the message
being conveyed by the sign, or to indicate when
the associated signs message is applicable (for
instance, “Red Signal Ahead When Flashing”). The
beacons supplementing warning signs and speed
limit signs are yellow. Those supplementing Stop
and Do Not Enter signs are red. These beacons,
whether yellow or red, and whether on continuously
or only intermittently, flash in a regular pattern,
approximately once per second
WORK ZONES
A work zone is an area along a highway where construction, maintenance or utility
work is occurring Because work zones often are unexpected and sometimes hinder
the smooth flow of traffic, they can present a challenge to even the most skilled
drivers. It is important for the driver’s own safety and the safety of pedestrians
and workers that drivers use great care when approaching and passing these sites
Special work zone traffic signs and other devices are set up in advance of where
the work actually is taking place and continue beyond the work area The zone
may be either stationary (a bridge being widened) or may be a mobile operation
that moves down the road slowly (pavement striping or patching).
STATE PARK
NEXT LEFT

-- 76 of 151 --

77
77
SECTION F OUR
Usually, temporary devices such as fixed or portable signs, changeable message
signs, arrow panels, pavement markings, and/or channeling devices (cones,
drums, barricades, etc.) are installed to guide traffic safely through the zone.
Traffic warning signs in work zones usually are orange.
When Approaching Or Driving Through A Work Zone
Stay alert for changing traffic patterns and slowing or stopped traffic. Stopped
traffic may be hidden around a curve or over a hill. Pay close attention to traffic
signs and other devices, such as cones, that are placed to safely guide you through
the work zone. Obey the directions of the police and flaggers:
• When you see signs indicating lane closures ahead, prepare to move
from the closed lane
• Watch for slower speeds limits. Fines for exceeding the speed limit
in a work zone are doubled
• Observe what other drivers are doing and avoid sudden moves
• Do not weave from lane to lane Brake gradually to give drivers
behind you ample time to slow down. Keep up with the flow of traffic.
• Be alert for unusual pavement surface conditions, such as rough
surfaces, metal plates, uneven pavement between lanes, and
dropoffs at the pavement edge. They can make it more difficult for
you to control your vehicle Gradual, controlled movements are best
under these circumstances
• Maintain a reasonable speed and spacing between vehicles You may
have nowhere to go if you are travelling too fast or following too
closely and the vehicle in front of you suddenly slows or stops
• Be patient and considerate to workers and other road users
At times, traffic in work zones must be stopped. This usually happens when
traffic from the opposite direction take turns using a single lane, when workers
or equipment must enter the lane of traffic, or where some work task might be
dangerous to passing vehicles. Then temporary traffic signals might be installed
or police stationed to direct traffic. More often, trained and certified flaggers with
stop/slow paddles are used to stop, slow and direct traffic through work zones.
Regulatory Signs
These signs tell drivers of the speed limit and other laws and regulations. Speed
limits may be reduced in work areas. The fine for violating the speed limit in a work
zone is much higher than usual speeding fines.

-- 77 of 151 --

78
Warning Signs
Warning signs are used to alert drivers to unusual or potentially hazardous
conditions in or near work zones Most signs used in highway and street work
areas are orange and diamond shaped. A few signs are rectangular.
Guiding Or Channelizing Devices
Barricades, drums, cones, and tubular markers are
the most commonly used devices to alert drivers of
unusual or potentially dangerous conditions on the
highway and street work areas and serve to guide
drivers safely through a work zone. At night they are
often equipped with flashing or steady burn lights
for improved visibility
Barricade 	Drum 	Cone 	Tubular Marker
Flashing Arrow Panels
Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels may be used in work zones both day
and night to guide drivers into certain traffic lanes and to inform them that part of
the road or street ahead of them is closed
Flaggers
Flaggers are often provided in highway and street work zones to stop, slow, or
guide traffic safely through the area. Flaggers wear yellow-green vests, shirts, or
jackets and use red flags or stop/slow paddles to direct traffic through work zones.
Or
Traffic Stop 	Traffic Proceed
with Caution
Or

-- 78 of 151 --

79
79
SECTION F OUR
SOME IMPORTANT DELAWARE LAWS
Cell Phone/Hand-Held Electronic Device Use While Driving
Delaware’s law prohibits the use of hand-held cell phones and texting while driving
Those who wish to talk on their cell phone while driving must use a hands-free
device. Drivers are permitted to dial a phone number or to activate/deactivate their
wireless equipment, and then they must put the device down. Delaware has also
banned the use of pagers, PDAs, BlackBerry devices, laptops, games or portable
computers, two-way communication devices, and any other hand-held electronic
communication devices, while driving
NOTE: All cell phone or electronic device use, including hands-free, is
prohibited by drivers with a Graduated Driver License (GDL).
Exemptions:
• Law enforcement, firefighter, EMS technician, or other operators of
authorized emergency vehicles in the performance of their official duties.
• Anyone reporting an emergency.
• A person driving or operating a farm tractor, non-registered farm
truck or farm equipment.
• HAM radio operators.
• Business or government employees who use a two-way radio
mounted or attached to a motor vehicle to communicate with a
central dispatch, base of operation, or with other employees (e.g.,
utility companies and DelDOT).
Signaling
Delaware law requires drivers to signal by hand or turn-signals when they intend
to stop, turn, or change lanes. The Driving Skills and Safety Tips Section further
explains the importance of communicating and signaling You must signal 300
feet prior to your intended action
Overtaking (Passing) Other Vehicles
• You must always stop before reaching any school bus from either
direction when it is stopped to load or unload school children except
when you are on the opposite side of a highway having four or more
lanes, even then proceed slowly
• “Delaware law states that vehicles shall overtake other vehicles on the
left only when at a safe distance and then only shall return to the right
when safely clear.” When passing a cyclist, the law requires motorists
to leave a minimum of three feet of clearance at all times, and on multi-
lane roads to move to the adjacent lane whenever possible
• Vehicles being overtaken shall give way to the right and not increase
their speed until fully overtaken
Please review the Driving Skills and Safety Tips Section for more information on
passing and overtaking

-- 79 of 151 --

80
Move Over Laws
Responding To Approaching Emergency Vehicles
Delaware law requires that upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle making use of a siren or displaying alternately flashing red,
red and white, red and blue, or red, white and blue lights, every other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to the right-hand edge or curb
of the roadway clear of any intersections until the authorized emergency vehicle
has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
This law extends to DelDOT vehicle operators (who are requested to provide
support to fire and police at the incident scene).
Approaching Stationary Emergency Vehicles
Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when the authorized
emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing red, blue,
blue and white, red and white, red and blue, or red, white and blue lights, or upon
approaching a stationary authorized DelDOT vehicle, which is giving a signal by
displaying alternately flashing amber or red and amber lights, or upon approaching
a stationary tow truck which is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing
amber, white, or amber and white lights, or a stationary vehicle displaying warning
signals, including vehicle hazard warning lights, road flares, traffic cones, caution
signs, or any non-vehicular warning signs, a person who drives an approaching
vehicle shall: proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way by making appropriate
lane changes when possible; or proceed with caution and reduce to a safe speed if
changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe
Move over laws help reduce risk of serious injuries and death to all public servants
who are working in harm’s way
Multi-Lane Roadway
Move over a lane from the stopped
vehicle(s) until you are safely past.
Two-lane Roadway
Slow down below the posted speed
Limit until you have completely
Passed the stopped vehicle(s).

-- 80 of 151 --

81
81
SECTION F OUR
TRAFFIC CONTROL LAWS
Traffic laws are needed to provide orderly movement of vehicles and pedestrians
and to prevent crashes. All users of Delaware’s highways are subject to Delaware
traffic laws. Whether you are driving a motor vehicle, riding a bicycle, propelling or
guiding some other vehicle, riding an animal, or walking, you must obey these laws
General Laws
You must know these general laws:
• You must obey the instructions of a police officer even though
they may be contrary to laws, signs, signals, and markings; such
instructions are occasionally necessary to keep traffic moving safely.
• You must not try to evade a traffic signal or road sign by leaving the
road and traveling across private property
Emergency Notification System (ENS)
• Every grade crossing has an emergency dispatch number for
contacting the railroad to report problems with the crossing, tracks
or train travel
• The ENS number is typically located on a blue sign on the actual
cross buck or it can be found in the vicinity of the crossing
• The sign also contains a DOT number that identifies the grade
crossing’s physical location so emergency crews or railroad
personnel can respond
This information is crucial for ALL DRIVERS to know. Utilizing the ENS is the best
and most efficient way to contact the railroads if there is a problem at the crossing
or if something is blocking the tracks The DOT number tells the dispatcher exactly
where the grade crossing is so they can notify all trains moving in that direction to
either come to a stop or slow down before reaching the crossing
Highway–Rail Intersection Signs And Signals
Railroad crossings have signs or signals to warn drivers. Never try to beat a train
across the tracks
Never start to cross if there is not room for your vehicle on the far side, or if you
will have to stop on the tracks Do not block the crossing Wait until there is room
for your vehicle on the far side. It is wise not to shift gears when crossing railroad
tracks, just in case you might stall. It would also be wise to review “Stalling On
Railroad Tracks” under Emergencies in Section Five. Remember that trains are

-- 81 of 151 --

82
large and may be moving faster
than they look. Some common
railroad crossing warning signs
and signals are shown in the
illustration below:
• A round yellow warning
sign with an “X” symbol
and black “RR” letters is
placed 	along 	the 	road
before 	you 	get 	to 	a
railroad crossing This is
the 	Advance 	Warning
Sign.
• Many highway–rail intersections have roadway surface or pavement
markings in advance of the crossing These markings usually include
an “X” symbol with the letters “RR” and a stop bar.
• A white, X-shaped sign or “crossbuck” with Railroad Crossing on it is
located at the railroad crossing This sign has the same meaning as a
Yield sign You must yield to crossing trains
• At some crossings, along with the crossbuck sign, you will see side-
by-side lights that will flash when a train is approaching. When the
lights are flashing, you must stop. At some crossings there is also a
crossing gate that will lower when a train is coming Do not drive
around the gate. Some crossings also have a bell that will sound. Do
not cross until the bell has stopped
• Crossings with more than one train track often will post a sign that
shows the number of tracks These signs warn you that there is more
than one track and there may be more than one train crossing. If
you come to a railroad crossing without a number-of-tracks sign, it
is important that you always check if there is more than one track
before crossing
Pavement Markings
Lines and symbols on the roadway divide lanes, tell you when you may pass other
vehicles or change lanes, which lanes to use for turns, define pedestrian walkways,
and where you must stop for signs or traffic signals:
• Edge Lines – Solid white lines along the side of the road show you
where the outside edge of the travel lane is located
• White lane marking – Multiple lanes of travel in the same direction
are separated by white lane markings. A broken white line between
lanes of traffic means that you may cross it to change lanes if it is safe
to do so. A solid white line between lanes
of traffic means that you are discouraged
from changing lanes Double solid white
lines prohibit lane-changing
• Crosswalks 	and 	stop 	lines 	– 	When
required to stop because of a sign or
signal, you must stop before your vehicle
reaches the stop line or if there is one,
a 	crosswalk. 	Crosswalks 	define 	the
area where pedestrians may cross the
roadway You must yield to pedestrians

-- 82 of 151 --

83
83
SECTION F OUR
in a crosswalk. Not all crosswalks are marked. Be alert for pedestrians
when crossing intersections
• Yellow lane markings – Lines separating traffic moving in opposite
directions are yellow. A broken yellow line between opposing lanes
of traffic means that you may cross it to pass if it is safe to do
so Where there is both a solid and a broken yellow line between
opposing lanes of traffic, you may not pass if the solid yellow line is
on your side. If the broken line is on your side, you may pass if it is
safe to do so. Two solid yellow lines between lanes of traffic means
neither side can pass You may cross a solid yellow line to turn into a
driveway, if it is safe to do so
Reversible Lanes
Although not common in Delaware, you may find some travel lanes are designed
to carry traffic in one direction at certain times and in the opposite direction at
other times These lanes are usually marked by double-broken yellow lines Before
you start driving in them, check to see which lanes you can use at that time There
may be signs posted by the side of the road or overhead
Special lights are often used. A green arrow means you can
use the lane beneath it; a red “X” means you cannot. A steady
yellow “X” means that the use of the lane is changing and you
should move out of it as soon as it is safe to do so
Reserved Lanes
On various roadways, one or more lanes may be reserved for
special vehicles. Reserved lanes are marked by signs stating
that the lane is reserved for special use:
• 	“Transit” or “bus” means the lane is for bus use only.
• 	“Bicycle” means the lane is reserved for bicycles.
• 	“HOV” stands for “High Occupancy Vehicles” and
indicates lanes reserved for vehicles with more than
one person in them. Signs say how many people must
be in the vehicle, as well as the days and hours to
which it applies. For example, “HOV 3” means there
must be at least three people in the vehicle
Roundabouts
A roundabout is a circular intersection that moves traffic counterclockwise around
a central island. Often confused with traditional “traffic circles”, one way modern
roundabouts differ is that they feature traffic calming qualities that encourage

-- 83 of 151 --

84
drivers to reduce their speed through the intersection The design of a roundabout
also reduces the need for direct left turns, which are a major reason for intersection
crashes, thereby increasing the overall safety aspect of the intersection. For more
information visit www.dmv.de.gov/services/driver_services/roundabouts.shtml
How to Use a Roundabout
• Approach the roundabout as you would a typical four-way
intersection Be in the right approach lane if you intend to turn right,
be in the left approach lane if you intend on making a left or U-turn,
and any approach lane is okay if you are proceeding straight
• Upon approaching the roundabout, stay to the right of the splitter
island and slow down to 10-15 mph
• Watch for bicyclists and allow for them to merge into the entry lane
• Watch for and yield to pedestrians in the crosswalk
• Yield to traffic already in the roundabout.
• Once you’re in the roundabout, do not stop except to avoid a collision;
you have the right-of-way over entering traffi c. Always keep to the
right of the central island and travel in a counterclockwise direction
Maintain a slow speed and do not pass other vehicles
• Look for your street and exit the roundabout.
• As you exit the roundabout, watch for and yield to pedestrians and
bicyclists
How to use a Diverging Diamond Intersection (DDI)
The DDI is based on a standard diamond interchange with a shift in the traffi c
within the interchange to safely and efficiently accommodate high volume left
turn movements. Within the interchange, traffi c briefly drives on the left side of the
road to allow left turn movements to occur without crossing oncoming traffi c or
stopping. A DDI has fewer confl ict points, reducing the opportunities for crashes,
and there is greater capacity for vehicles at the interchange

-- 84 of 151 --

85
85
SECTION F OUR
Shared Center Lane
These center lanes are reserved for making left turns (or
U-turns when they are permitted) but can be used by vehicles
traveling in both directions On the pavement, left-turn arrows
for traffic in one direction alternate with left-turn arrows for
traffic coming from the opposite direction. These lanes are
marked on each side by a solid yellow and broken yellow lines
In some areas, the shared center lane becomes a “reversible
lane” during rush hours. Be sure you can enter the lane before
you do so, and then only if it is safe to do so
General Rules
When there are no signs or markings to control the use of lanes, there are rules
that indicate which lane is to be used These rules cover general driving, passing,
and turning
General driving – Never back a vehicle in any travel lane except to parallel park,
or if necessary to exit a driveway. It is unsafe to do so. Drivers do not expect a
vehicle to be backing towards them and may not realize it until it is too late. If you
miss your turn or exit, do not back up; go on to where you can safely turn around
Do not stop in travel lanes for any reason (confusion, breakdown, letting out a
passenger, etc.). Keep moving until you can safely pull off the road.
On a road with two or more lanes traveling in the same direction, stay in the right
lane except to pass On a road with three or more lanes traveling in the same
direction, if there is a lot of entering or exiting traffic, use the center travel lane.
Passing – On multi-lane roads, the left-most lane is intended to be used for passing
slower vehicles. If you pass on the right, the other driver may have difficulty seeing
you and might suddenly change lanes in front of you. It is legal in Delaware to pass
left-turning vehicles on the right, however this is a very crash-prone situation and
must be accomplished with great caution You may use the shoulder to pass left-
turning vehicles on the right in Delaware; however, other drivers will not expect
you to be there so extreme care is required.
Turning – Where there are no signs or lane markings to control turning, you should
turn from the lane that is closest to the direction you want to go and turn into the
lane closest to the one you came from This way, you will cross the fewest lanes of
traffic. When making turns, go from one lane to the other as directly as possible
without crossing lane lines or interfering with traffic. Once you have completed
your turn, you can change to another lane if you need to
• Right turns – On right turns, avoid swinging wide to the left before
making the turn. If you swing wide, the driver behind you may think
you are changing
lanes or going to
turn left and may
try to pass you on
the right. If you
swing wide as you
complete the turn,
drivers who are in
the far lane will not
expect to see you
there

-- 85 of 151 --

86
• Left turns – When making a left turn, avoid cutting the corner so
sharply that you run into someone approaching from the left. However,
be sure to leave room for oncoming vehicles to turn left in front of you
• Multiple lanes turning – If there are signs or lane markings that allow
for two or more turning lanes, stay in your lane during the turn
• Median Crossings – Pay attention to signs; if crossing is marked for
emergency vehicles only, it is illegal for you to cross there When
crossing is legal and not marked otherwise, the rule “keep to the right”
applies in median crossings Drivers should treat the median the same
as a roadway and stay to the right of the opening at all times
Right-Of-Way
Where vehicles or pedestrians are likely to meet one another and there are no signs
or signals to regulate traffic, there are rules on who must yield the right-of-way.
These rules tell who goes first and who must wait in different traffic situations. You
must do everything you can to prevent striking a pedestrian or another vehicle,
regardless of the circumstances
The following right-of-way rules apply at intersections:
• Drivers must yield where necessary to avoid striking pedestrians
who are crossing the road
• Drivers crossing a sidewalk entering or exiting a driveway, alley,
or parking lot must yield to pedestrians. It is illegal to drive on a
sidewalk except to cross it
• Pedestrians using a guide dog or carrying a white cane have absolute
right-of-way Do not use your horn as it could confuse or frighten the
blind pedestrian
• Drivers turning left must yield to oncoming vehicles going straight ahead
• Drivers entering a traffic circle or rotary must yield to drivers already
in the circle
• At an intersection where there is no stop sign, yield sign, or traffic
signal, drivers should yield to vehicles coming from the right. However,
it would be safest to consider yielding to all vehicles before entering
• At a 4-way stop, the driver reaching the intersection first, goes first
(after coming to a complete stop). If more than one vehicle arrives
at the same time, the vehicle on the right goes first.
• Drivers entering a road from a driveway, alley, or roadside must yield
to vehicles already on the main road This includes entering from turn
only lanes, where vehicles must yield, to include stopping if necessary

-- 86 of 151 --

87
87
SECTION F OUR
• Drivers may not enter an intersection unless they can get through it
without having to stop. You should wait until traffic ahead clears so
that you are not blocking the intersection
• Drivers overtaking a vehicle traveling in the same traffic direction must
yield to that vehicle (even if the vehicle slows down or comes to a stop).
• You must yield the right-of-way to a police vehicle, fire engine,
ambulance, or other emergency vehicle using a siren, air horn, or a
red or blue flashing light. Pull over to the right edge of the road or
as near to the right as possible when you see or hear an emergency
vehicle approaching from any direction. Follow any instructions
given over the emergency vehicle’s loudspeaker. If you are in an
intersection, drive through the intersection before you pull over
Stopping For School Buses
You must always stop before reaching any school bus from either direction when it
is stopped to load or unload school children except when you are on the opposite
side of a highway having four or more lanes, even then proceed slowly
Yellow Lights
School buses have two overhead alternately flashing yellow lights both front
and rear They will be activated approximately 10 seconds prior to the overhead
flashing red lights to warn drivers of approaching vehicles that a stop to load or
unload school children is about to be made. Approach a bus flashing these yellow
lights with caution and anticipate a stop Children may be waiting for the bus or
may be running to board it
Red Lights
The overhead alternately flashing red lights and stop arm will be activated when
the bus is stopped to pick up and discharge pupils You must not proceed until
the red lights have stopped flashing, and the stop arm has been retracted, then
proceed cautiously
Less Than
4 Roadway
Lanes
BOTH
Directions
Must STOP
4 or More
Roadway
Lanes
Only Traffic
Following
Must STOP

-- 87 of 151 --

88
Identification of Violators
If any vehicle is witnessed by a police officer, school bus operator, or school
crossing guard to be in violation of the school bus stop law and the operator is not
otherwise apparent, it shall be assumed that the person in whose name the vehicle
is registered committed such violation
Penalties and Suspension of License for Passing a Stopped School Bus with Red
Lights Flashing
Whoever is convicted of passing a stopped school bus with overhead and stop
arm red lights flashing shall, for the first offense, be fined not less than $115.00 nor
more than $230 00, or imprisoned not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days, or
both. For each subsequent like offense occurring within three years, such person
shall be fined not less than $115.00 nor more than $575.00, and imprisoned not less
than 60 days nor more than six months
Upon conviction for passing a stopped school bus with overhead and stop arm red
lights flashing, the Division of Motor Vehicles shall suspend the driver license and/
or driving privilege for a period of one month for a first offense, six months for a
second offense, or one year for a third or further subsequent violation occurring
within three years of a prior violation. A conditional license may be issued following
a suspension for a second offense after serving a minimum period of suspension
without driving authority of three months. A conditional license may be issued
following a suspension for a third or further subsequent offense after serving a
minimum period of suspension without driving authority of six months. No driving
authority is permitted during the one month suspension for a first offense.
House Bill Number 202 authorizes the Red Clay Consolidated School District to
install stop arm cameras on their school buses as part of the School Bus Safety
Pilot Program The owner or operator of a vehicle who has failed to comply with
§ 4166(d)(1) of Title 21, as evidenced by information obtained from a school bus
safety camera system, shall be subject to a civil or administrative assessment of
$100 for a first offense, which shall increase to $500 for each subsequent offense
within 10 years of the prior offense or offenses; provided, however, that the School
District may provide for an additional assessment not to exceed $10 if the civil or
administrative assessment is not paid within 20 days, which assessment may be
increased to an amount not to exceed $20 if the assessment is not paid within 45
days, and may be increased to an amount not to exceed $30 if the assessment is
not paid within 90 days Court costs or similar administrative fees not to exceed
$35 may also be assessed against an owner or operator who requests a hearing to
contest the violation and is ultimately found or pleads responsible for the violation
or who fails to pay or contest the violation in a timely manner. No assessments
and court costs other than those specified in this subsection may be imposed. A
violation for which a civil assessment is imposed under this subsection shall not
be classified as a criminal offense and shall not be made a part of the operating
record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed, nor shall it be used for
insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance

-- 88 of 151 --

89
89
SECTION F OUR
PARKING
General Parking Rules
Parking and leaving your vehicle – When parking and leaving your vehicle on a
highway or street, you must stop the engine, lock the ignition, remove the key, and
set the brakes. It is also advisable to raise the windows and lock the doors.
Parallel Parking – When parking on a two-way highway you must park
parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the highway
When you take the test for your driver license, you will have to
show the examiner that you can park a car in a parallel parking
space The steps for parallel parking are:
Check for traffic in your rearview mirror. If a car behind you is
following too closely, do not stop suddenly Continue driving and
find another space. Stopping suddenly with a car behind you may
result in a rear-end collision Put on your turn signal to warn other
drivers that you intend to park
1. Signal and stop with the back end of your vehicle even with the
back of the vehicle in front of the place you want to park
2 Back slowly, turning your steering wheel to the right to aim the
back of your car towards the front of the one behind you
3. As the front of your car clears the back of the car in front of you,
turn your wheels sharply to the left and continue backing slowly
until the back of your car almost touches the car behind you
4. Straighten your wheels and pull forward to center the car in the
parking space Your car should be no more than 12 inches from
the curb Put the transmission in park and set the brake Turn
off the engine. (It is against the law to leave keys in a running,
unattended vehicle.)
To park by the left-hand curb on a one-way street, follow the same directions but
reverse right and left in the instructions
If your car has a manual transmission, leave it in low gear when parked and headed
uphill. Leave it in reverse when parked and headed downhill. This will help prevent
a crash if your emergency or parking brake should fail
To leave a parallel parking space, signal your move. Watch for traffic and turn your
steering wheel towards the open lane, easing your way out into traffic.
Handicapped Parking – It is illegal to park in any parking space designated for
“Handicapped Parking” unless your vehicle has a handicapped license plate
displayed on the rear of the vehicle or a handicapped parking ID card displayed
hanging from the rearview mirror
Parking Lights – When you park a vehicle on the shoulder or side of any highway
from sunset to sunrise or when light is insufficient to see persons or objects
1000 feet away, you must turn on your parking lights (or 4-way flashers when
vehicle is so equipped). Turn signal lights shall not be flashed on one side only
of a parked vehicle

-- 89 of 151 --

90
Turn wheels
to curb
Turn wheels
from curb
Turn wheels
to right
Parking on Highways – You must never park on the paved or traveled part of any
highway outside of a business or residence unless vehicle is disabled and cannot
be moved Pull off to the right as far as possible
Parking on Hill – When headed downhill you must turn your front wheels toward
curb or edge of road When headed uphill, and there is a curb, you must turn your
front wheels away from curb and bring near-side front wheel into contact with
curb When headed uphill and there is no curb, you must turn your front wheels
toward edge of highway. It is also wise to leave your vehicle in gear.
Opening Door of Parked Vehicle – You must never open the door of a vehicle so
as to impede the flow of traffic or endanger any person or vehicle. Instead, use the
door on the curb side Turn and check for any oncoming vehicle if you must use
the door on the street side Be especially aware of oncoming bicyclists; they may
be severely injured by a collision with a car door
Stopping And Parking Violations
Unless otherwise posted, ordered to do so by a police officer, or to avoid a crash,
you must not stop or park your vehicle in any of the following places even if
someone is left in the car:
• At any place where official signs prohibit such action.
• Whenever a curb is painted yellow or a yellow line is placed at the
edge of a roadway
• In an intersection, on a crosswalk, or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at
an intersection
• On a sidewalk
• In front of a public or private road, driveway, or alley.
• Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
• Within 20 feet of driveway entrance to any fire station or on the
opposite side of the street within 75 feet of an entrance when signs
are posted

-- 90 of 151 --

91
91
SECTION F OUR
• Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic signal.
• Between a safety zone or island and the adjacent curb, or within 30
feet of end of safety zone or island unless otherwise posted
• Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing unless otherwise posted
• Alongside or opposite any road excavation or obstruction when
traffic will be impeded.
• On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb
• On any bridge or elevated structure on a highway or in a tunnel
• At any other place where stopping, standing, or parking will obstruct
the free flow of traffic.
• In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
• In any designated fire lane.
SPEED
Delaware traffic laws provide both a general speed restriction and specific speed
limits You must obey both
General Speed Restriction
You must not drive on a Delaware highway at a speed greater than is reasonable
under existing conditions This means that it is not always lawful to drive as fast as
the posted speed limit. Remember that you must always control the speed of your
vehicle to avoid hitting any person, vehicle, or other conveyance no matter what
the weather conditions, traffic density or your urgency may be.
Speed Limits
You must not drive any vehicle faster than the speeds listed in this table (refer to
Section Two, License Revocations & Suspensions for penalties under the Delaware
Point System):
Under emergency conditions, the speed limits below may be changed
The driver must never exceed the posted limit
Place 	Speed Limit
School zones* 	20 miles per hour
Business districts 	25 miles per hour
Residential districts 	25 miles per hour
Two-lane roads 	50 miles per hour
Divided roads & roads having four or more lanes 	55 miles per hour
Controlled access highways (turnpikes & expressways) 	55 miles per hour
Route 1 and interstate 495 	65 miles per hour
*Note: When children are present is defined in Title 21 of Delaware Code.

-- 91 of 151 --

92
Whenever any of the above speed limits are unsafe for conditions, they may be
reduced to lower speed limits. Signs may be placed along the highway showing
the speed limit in such conditions
Minimum Speed
You must not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede normal and
reasonable movement of traffic, except when necessary for safety or compliance
with the law
You must obey posted minimum speed limits, except when weather or other
conditions make it unsafe to do so
Speed Signs
There are two speed signs: speed limit signs and advisory (recommended) speed
signs. Speed limit signs have black letters and numerals on a white rectangular
background and are the legal allowable limits. Advisory speed signs have black
letters on a yellow background and often are shown under a warning sign. Advisory
speed signs are posted along portions of highways to warn you that conditions may
often make it unsafe to drive faster. Although an advisory speed is not a specific
speed limit, if you exceed it and have a crash, it may be concluded that you violated
the general speed restriction and you could be subject to arrest
OTHER HIGHWAY USERS
You, as the driver of a motor vehicle, must share the highway with pedestrians,
bicyclists, motorcyclists, animal riders and drivers, and those driving farm vehicles,
road machinery, and construction equipment. All highway users must obey traffic
laws This includes drivers, pedestrians, and bicyclists
Pedestrians
From 2021-2023, there were 89 pedestrian fatalities. Fatalities are often the result
of pedestrians who are not wearing reflective clothing or carrying a light while
walking at night, not crossing the road within a designated crosswalk and/or are
under the influence of alcohol.
Please Note: It is imperative to be aware of your surroundings as a driver and stop
if a pedestrian is actively crossing in a marked or unmarked crosswalk You may
proceed with caution if a pedestrian is standing/stopped safely on the sidewalk
as required by law.
Your Responsibility As A Driver
• Be alert for pedestrians walking along or crossing the road; lightly tap
horn if necessary. Sounding the horn is not considered a substitute
for yielding to pedestrians
• Drivers should be alert for individuals and must yield the right-of-way
to pedestrians who are hearing impaired or have physical disabilities
that require use of canes, crutches, walkers, guide dogs/service
animals, wheelchairs, or motorized scooters These individuals may
have difficulty detecting oncoming traffic and may need extra time
to cross the road
• You must not drive through a pedestrian safety zone or block a
crosswalk

-- 92 of 151 --

93
93
SECTION F OUR
• You must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian within a crosswalk,
stopping if necessary
• You must not pass a vehicle stopped to allow a pedestrian to cross
the highway
• You should be especially watchful for children near schools and in
residential districts Do not speed in school zones
• You must always stop before reaching a school bus when it is
stopped to load or unload school children, except when you are on
the opposite side of a divided highway having four or more lanes
• You should look carefully for traffic before leaving your vehicle.
Don’t become a pedestrian casualty
• Drive defensively at all times
Your Responsibility As A Pedestrian
• When a sidewalk is provided, you must walk on the sideway
• When there is no sidewalk, walk on the shoulder facing oncoming
traffic as far away from the road as possible.
• It is illegal to walk along any roadway at night without carrying a
light or reflector. You should wear light-colored clothing if possible.
• You must not walk on a highway when under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
• You must not stand on the highway to ask for a ride or to conduct
any kind of business
• You should cross the roadway and its shoulders only at marked
crosswalks Where crosswalks are not present, you must cross at
intersections Where intersections are not present and you need to
cross the road, do so quickly and only after you have looked in both
directions for oncoming traffic.
• You must obey pedestrian “Walk” and “Don’t Walk” signals when they are
used. A blinking “Don’t Walk” signal means do not enter the intersection.
• Be alert for turning cars before crossing a highway at an intersection
• You must not cross an intersection diagonally except when
authorized by traffic-control signals.
Who Must Yield To Pedestrians
Pedestrians have the right-of-way:
• When crossing a highway at an intersection and the green light or
walk signal is in their favor
• When crossing within a marked or unmarked crosswalk
• When on a sidewalk as it crosses an alley, entrance, or driveway
• When they are blind and crossing with white canes or guide dogs
Pedestrians must yield the right-of-way:
• When crossing a highway other than within a marked crosswalk or
an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
• When crossing the roadway where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
crossing is provided

-- 93 of 151 --

94
Bicycles
As cyclists sometimes like to remind drivers,
there were bicycles on Delaware’s public roads
before motor vehicles were ever invented and
even though the amount of motor vehicle traffic
on the roads has since exploded cyclists retain
their legal right to use public roadways despite
the growth of vehicle traffic. In fact, cyclists have
the right to use all Delaware roads except limited
access highways
Bicycle Friendly Delaware Act
1. This law requires drivers to change lanes (including when there is a
double yellow line) when passing bicycles if the travel lanes are too
narrow for sharing. Motorists must give bicyclists at least three (3)
feet of room when passing
2 Motorists are forbidden from honking their horn at bicyclists unless
there is an imminent danger
3 Bicyclists should ride to the right of the roadway as their safety allows
4 Bicyclists are now allowed to yield at stop signs, after carefully
looking for other vehicles and no longer required to stop.
Bike Box
A bike box is a designated area at the head of a traffic lane at intersections
that provides bicyclists with a safe way to turn and a visible way to get
ahead of traffic. The benefits to a bike box is that it increases the visibility
of bicyclists, helps prevent ‘right-hook’ conflicts with turning vehicles,
provides priority of bicyclists at signalized crossing at major intersections
and bicyclists can avoid breathing exhaust fumes. Pedestrians also benefit
from a bike box as it reduces vehicle encroachment into the crosswalk

-- 94 of 151 --

95
95
SECTION F OUR
Two-Way Cycle Tracks
A two-way cycle tracks are physically separated cycle tracks that allow
bicycle movement in both directions on one side of the road. A two-
way cycle track may be configured as a protected cycle track at street
level with a parking lane or other barrier between the cycle track and the
motor vehicle travel lane. The benefits to a cycle track are they dedicate
and protects space for bicyclists by improving comfort and safety while
eliminating risk and fear of collisions with vehicles Cycle tracks are more
attractive to a wide range of bicyclists at all levels and ages
Your Responsibility As A Driver
When you are driving at slower speeds on local streets, you can safely and legally
interact with bicycles much as you would with other vehicles When you are driving
at higher speeds, however, the air pressure created by your vehicle passing too
closely (particularly if you are driving a truck or a bus) can cause a cyclist to crash.
In order to pass a bicycle safely, the law in Delaware requires that you completely
change lanes, including crossing a double-yellow center line, if the travel lane you
are traveling in is too narrow for the vehicle you are driving and the bicycle you
want to pass to travel safely side by side within the lane. In the unusual case of
very wide travel lanes (wide enough for both your vehicle and a bicycle), the law
permits you to pass a bicycle without changing lanes but requires that you (a)
slow down when doing so and (b) leave a minimum of three feet of clearance at all
times between your vehicle and the bicycle
If the road you are driving on has only two lanes and you are unable to pass safely
because of lack of visibility and/or oncoming traffic, follow at a safe distance
and wait until it is safe before passing. Allow plenty of clearance after overtaking
a cyclist, before you pull to the right The cyclist’s speed may be greater than
you realize. It is illegal to blow your horn at a cyclist except in the very narrow
circumstance when you are warning the cyclist of an imminent collision
Many car/cycle crashes occur because the motorist does not see the cyclist. Be
especially careful to look for cyclists when you are preparing to enter a roadway or
to make a turn. Intersections are particularly dangerous for both cars and cycles.
Make sure that there is sufficient time before turning left or right. Don’t pass a
cyclist only to turn directly in front of them. When in doubt, wait. At night, be
aware that bicycles can be harder to see

-- 95 of 151 --

96
Your Responsibility As The Parent of A Youthful Cyclist
Under the law, the parent (or guardian) can be held responsible if a child, while
bicycling, violates any traffic law. As a parent, you have the responsibility to be
sure that the child is ready and able to use a bicycle safely, and that they know
and obeys the traffic laws. You are also responsible if your child (under the age of
18) is not wearing a helmet.
Your Responsibility As An Adult Cyclist
There are four critical rules that the adult cyclist should follow in order to interact
safely with motor vehicles:
1. Control Your Bicycle: Before you venture into traffic, make sure that
you have mastered the control of your bicycle; riding in a straight
line, turning, and stopping smoothly
2. Be Aware of Motor Vehicle Traffic (especially at intersections): Most
serious and fatal bicycle crashes occur at intersections Be prepared
to yield to motor vehicle traffic at intersections (even when you
think you have the right-of-way).
3. Be Seen: Increasing your visibility will help to protect you on the
road. At night, always have the required white headlight and red
rear-reflector on your bicycle. A red taillight and additional reflectors
are also helpful
4. Be Predictable: Riding your bicycle in a predictable manner is
essential to your safety on the road This means riding with motor
vehicle traffic, not against it; signaling your intentions clearly and
in plenty of time; and choosing a path of travel which won’t cause
you to swerve into traffic to avoid hazards. Use hand signals to
communicate your intentions to other vehicles. (See Section Five –
Communicating)
The following additional Rules of the Road apply to cyclists in Delaware:
• If you are cycling in an atypical and unusually wide travel lane (wide
enough for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side-by-side), you
should cycle in the right side of the lane so that motor vehicles can
pass on your left without having to change lanes (as long as you feel
it is safe for you to do so).
• You must not ride at night unless you have a white headlight visible
for 500 feet, a red rear reflector visible for 600 feet, and either
reflective material visible from both sides for 600 feet or a lighted
lamp visible from both sides for 500 feet. A taillight is recommended.
• When riding a bicycle, you must be on or astride a permanent seat
• You may not carry a passenger unless your bicycle is designed for
carrying a passenger
• You must not cling to any vehicle upon the highway
• You must not ride on a highway facing traffic.
• When riding a bicycle, you must keep at least one hand on the handle
bars at all times
• You must yield to pedestrians on a sidewalk and in a crosswalk and
give an audible signal before overtaking
• You must not wear a headset covering both ears

-- 96 of 151 --

97
97
SECTION F OUR
• All persons under the age of 18 must wear a properly fitted and
fastened bicycle helmet
Stop Signs
You must stop at all stop signs located at intersections with major (3 travel lanes or
more) roads; or if a motor vehicle is stopped at the stop sign you are approaching;
or if required for safety because of heavy traffic. At stop signs controlling the
intersection with minor roads and if there is no stopped vehicle at the sign you are
approaching, however, you may treat the stop sign as a yield sign: After slowing-
and yielding the right-of-way to any vehicle at or approaching the intersection
– you may cautiously make a turn or proceed through the intersection without
stopping
Shared Lane Marking
The shared lane marking may be used on some roadways to assist
bicyclists in lateral positioning, to encourage safe passing of cyclists
by motorists, to reduce the incidence of wrong way bicycling, and as a
reminder that the lane may be legally used by both cyclists and motor
vehicles
Sharing The Road With Motorcycles
The increasing popularity of motorcycle riding is evident by the variety of riders and
two-wheeled motor vehicles appearing on our streets and highways Motorcycle
crash statistics show that a substantial percentage of the crashes involve riders
with limited experience
Nationally, almost half of all motorcycle crashes involve other motor vehicles. In
collisions with motorcycles, drivers often say they never saw the motorcycle. In
Delaware, there were 15 motorcycle fatalities during 2023 and 22 fatalities in 2022
There were 955 injury crashes involving motorcycles during the five-year period
between 2015-2020. Always remain alert and check your blind spot frequently to
make sure that a motorcycle is not present You need to be especially alert for
motorcycles when turning at intersections and when pulling out from a side road
or driveway
Motorcyclists have the same rights and responsibilities on public roadways as
other highway users. While legally everyone must abide by the same traffic laws,
there are special situations and conditions you need to be aware of so you can
share the road safely with those who choose to use two wheels instead of four
Why is it so important that you be aware of motorcycles and their operation?
Primarily because motorcycles are not easily identified in traffic. Motorcycles
are only about two feet wide compared with the five- to six-foot width of an
automobile. Even when seen, it’s difficult for some drivers to judge how far away
motorcyclists are
Finally, even when seen and the distance is correctly judged, some drivers can’t
tell how fast motorcycles are going Being alert to this special perceptual problem
and how motorcyclists react to specific situations can help you to avoid colliding
with motorcyclists in traffic. Below are a few of the specific situations that call for
special attention by motorcyclists and you

-- 97 of 151 --

98
Left turns in front of an oncoming motorcyclist account for a large percentage of
car/cycle injury-producing crashes. The problem of not seeing the motorcyclist is
twofold: car drivers may fail to pick the cyclist out of the traffic scene, or drivers
may fail to judge the speed of the oncoming motorcycle The correct behavior
is to look and look again Make sure you see the motorcycle and know its speed
before you make a left turn
Turn signals are not automatically self-canceling on most motorcycles. At times,
the rider may forget to turn the signal off Before you make a turn in front of a
motorcyclist, be sure the rider is turning and not continuing straight ahead into
your path with a forgotten turn signal still blinking
Following distance behind the motorcyclist should be at a two second count when
traveling at speeds under 40 mph and a four second count for speeds above
40 mph. Following too closely may make the rider nervous causing the rider’s
attention to be distracted from the road and traffic ahead. Motorcycles can stop
quicker, so you need to follow at a safe distance. If the roadway is slippery or wet,
increase your following distance
Lane usage for the motorcyclist is critical. Motorcycles are entitled to the same
full lane width as all other vehicles. A skilled motorcycle operator is constantly
changing positions within that lane to maximize his ability to see and be seen,
and to compensate for objects in or near the road. Never move into the same lane
alongside a motorcycle even if the lane is wide and the cyclist is riding far to one
side. It is not only illegal, it is extremely hazardous.
Inclement weather and slippery surfaces can be real problems for motorcycles.
Allow even more following distance for motorcyclists when it’s raining or the road
surface is wet and slippery. Skilled motorcycle riders will slow down under these
conditions. Remember, motorcycles only have two wheels compared to your four.
Also, be alert to the problem of glare that rain and wet surfaces create, especially
at night. It is easy to lose sight of a motorcycle and its rider under the best of
circumstances. Rain, wind, dust, and smog affect the cyclist’s vision more easily
than yours in an enclosed vehicle The cyclist’s face shield, windshield, or goggles
help, but cannot completely overcome all the vision limitations under these
conditions
Cross winds can be hazardous to motorcyclists Windy conditions can actually
move a motorcycle out of its lane of travel. Areas to look out for are wide open,
long stretches of highways and bridges. Fast-moving large trucks have been
known to create wind blasts which can startle a motorcyclist, and under certain
conditions actually move the motorcyclist out of his path of travel Be alert to
these conditions so you can prepare yourself for the possible quick change in
speed or direction of the motorcycle
Road surfaces and things in the road that do not normally affect other vehicles can
create problems for the cyclist Gravel, debris, pavement seams, small animals, and
even manhole covers may cause the motorcyclist to change speed or direction
Railroad grade crossings may be rough or cross the road at an angle. The rider
may slow down or change direction so the tracks can be crossed head on The
cyclist may rise up off the seat to help cushion the shock of a rough crossing
Metal or grated bridges create a wobbling sensation in the front tire of the
motorcycle greater than the feeling you experience in your car This wobbling
sensation may cause the inexperienced motorcyclist to quickly change direction
or slow down

-- 98 of 151 --

99
99
SECTION F OUR
Motorcycle Operation And License Endorsements
If you are less than 18 years old, you must take and pass the Delaware Motorcycle
Rider Education Program.
Details on how to add a motorcycle endorsement to a driver license, required
equipment, and safe operation are given in separate manuals available at each of
the offices of the Division of Motor Vehicles (see outside back cover for addresses).
Also see the endorsement information in Section Two of this manual.
You must always have in your possession approved eye protection and an approved
helmet for yourself and your passenger when operating a motorcycle You must
wear this equipment if you are operating with a learner’s permit (including taking
the road test), and if you are under 19 years of age.
Any person who obtains a new endorsement for a motorcycle, or someone riding with
the newly endorsed person, is required by law to wear a helmet and eye protection
for the first 2 years after the newly endorsed person receives the endorsement. A
person operating or riding as a passenger on a motorcycle on the roadways of this
State who fails to comply with this law is subject to civil penalties or assessments.
Mopeds And Tripeds
Following is some of the information you will need to know to make your operation
of a moped and triped legal, safe, and enjoyable:
• Mopeds and tripeds shall not be operated upon interstate and limited
access highways, nor shall they be operated on the right-of-way of an
operating railroad, nor shall they be operated on any path set aside
for the use of bicycles unless the helper motor has been turned off
• You cannot legally operate a moped and triped upon any public
road unless you have a valid driver license
• Mopeds and tripeds must be registered under the regulations
adopted by the Division of Motor Vehicles. Registration and re-
registration shall be for three years and cost $5 00
• Mopeds and tripeds must have a light on front and rear and have a bell or
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet
• It is important that you watch for traffic as far ahead as possible, be
prepared for sudden stops, for traffic approaching left or right at
intersections, and for vehicles pulling out from the curb
• It is recommended that every person operating or riding a moped or
a triped wear a safety helmet and bright, reflective clothing.
Off Highway Vehicles
Registration of off highway vehicles (OHV) is required statewide. Registration
application can be processed at any Motor Vehicle office (see back cover for addresses).
The applicant must have a description of the OHV (make, year, serial number), and be
at least 18 years of age The fee for registration is $6 00 for three years
OHVs may not be operated upon public streets or highways, and you must have
the permission of the property owner before you may operate on private property
The operator and all passengers must wear a safety helmet with chin straps
All OHVs must have brakes or a similar device capable of controlling the vehicle.
All OHVs must have a muffler that reduces the noise level by 60%.

-- 99 of 151 --

100
Animal Riders And Animal Drivers
As the rider of any animal or the driver of any animal-drawn vehicle
on the highway, you have all the rights and all the duties of the
driver of a motor vehicle except where, by their very nature, the
laws can have no application
Farm Tractors And Equipment, Road Machinery,
And Construction Equipment
For the purposes of this section, you, as the driver of any such tractor or other self-
propelled equipment, whether or not hauling another vehicle or piece of machinery
or equipment, have all the rights and all the duties of any other motor vehicle on
the highway The special laws and regulations further governing their registration,
size, weight, and operation on the highways are given in a supplement available
at each of the offices of the Division (see outside of back cover for addresses).
Who Must Not Use The Highway
You must not drive a minibike, a go-cart, golf cart, dirtbike, motorized scooter,
snowmobile, or other all-terrain vehicles which are not permitted to be registered
by the Division upon the highway. (See definition of minibike to differentiate from
motorcycle.)
Slow-Moving Vehicles
A “Slow-Moving Vehicle” emblem—a triangular, fluorescent and
reflective orange sign—is sometimes attached to farm tractors
and other slow-moving vehicles to warn approaching drivers
When you see this sign, slow down immediately and proceed
with caution
Sharing The Road With A Truck
Whether you’re sharing the road with a car, truck, bus, or other large vehicle, it’s
important for safety’s sake to obey traffic laws, abide by the rules of the road, and
drive defensively. Are there any special rules for sharing the road with a truck?
Yes! Here are some suggestions from professional truck drivers.
Passing
When passing a truck, first check to your front and rear and then move into the
passing lane only if it is clear and you are in a legal passing zone. If needed, let the
truck driver know you are passing by blinking your headlights, especially at night

-- 100 of 151 --

101
101
SECTION F OUR
On a level highway, it takes only three to five seconds longer to pass a truck than
a car On an upgrade, a truck often loses speed, so it is easier to pass than a car
On a downgrade, the truck’s momentum will cause it to go faster, so you may need
to increase your speed
Complete your pass as quickly as possible, and don’t stay alongside the other
vehicle
If the driver blinks his lights after you pass, it’s a signal that it is clear to pull back
in Be sure to move back only when you can see the front of the truck in your rear-
view mirror. After you pass a truck, maintain your speed.
When a truck passes you, you can help the truck driver by keeping to the far side
of your lane You’ll make it easier for the truck driver if you reduce speed slightly
In any event, don’t speed up while the truck is passing. After passing, the truck
driver will signal to let you know that the truck will be returning to your lane
When you meet a truck coming from the opposite direction, keep as far as possible
to the side to avoid a sideswipe crash and to reduce the wind turbulence between
the two vehicles. Remember that the turbulence pushes the vehicles apart. It does
not suck them together
Near A Truck – No-Zone
In general, trucks take slightly longer than cars to stop because of their size.
If you’re near a truck, try to stay out of its “blind spots” also called the “No-Zone”
as depicted here:
THE KEY TO SAFER HIGHWAYS: KNOW THE NO-ZONE
The No-Zone represents danger areas around trucks where crashes are more likely
to occur
• Passing - When cars cut in too soon after passing, then abruptly
slow down, truck drivers are forced to compensate with little time or
room to spare Because it takes longer to pass a large vehicle, you
should maintain a consistent speed when passing, and be sure you
can see the cab of the truck in your rear-view mirror before pulling
in front
• Backing Up - When a truck is backing up, it sometimes must
temporarily block the street to maneuver its trailer accurately
Never pass close behind a truck that is in the process of backing up.
Remember, most trailers are 8.5 feet wide and can completely hide
objects that suddenly come between them and a loading area. So if
you try to pass behind the truck, you enter a (No-Zone) blindspot for
you and the truck driver
• Rear Blindspots - Unlike cars, trucks have deep blindspots directly
behind them. Avoid tailgating in this No-Zone. The truck driver
can’t see your car in this position, and your own view of traffic
flow is severely reduced. Following too closely greatly increases
your chance of a rear-end collision with a truck. Allow at least four
seconds between your vehicle and the truck, and remember that you
too cannot see, and plan ahead if you follow too closely

-- 101 of 151 --

102
• Side Blindspots - Trucks have much larger blindspots on both sides
of their vehicles than passenger vehicles When you drive in these
blindspots (No-Zone) for any length of time, the truck driver can’t
see you. If a commercial driver needs to change lanes quickly for any
reason, a serious crash could occur with the vehicle in the No-Zone.
• Wide Turns - Truck drivers sometimes need to swing wide to the
left in order to safely negotiate a right turn They cannot see cars
directly behind them Cutting in between the commercial vehicle
and the curb or shoulder to the right increases the possibility of a
crash
Backing Crashes
Sixty-six percent of all commercial vehicle crashes are while backing; therefore,
never try to cross behind a truck which is preparing to back up Often when a truck
driver is preparing to back the truck from a roadway into a loading area, there is
no choice but to temporarily block the roadway. It is here that some drivers and
pedestrians attempt to pass behind the truck rather than wait the few seconds for
the truck to complete its maneuver. In passing close behind the truck, the driver or
pedestrian enters the truck’s blind spot, and a crash may occur
Reporting a Commercial Safety Violation
To report a possible commercial safety violation regarding hazardous materials,
passenger transportation or household goods movement you may call 1-888-DOT-
SAFT (368-7238) available Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. EST, or visit
http://nccdb.fmcsa.dot.gov/

-- 102 of 151 --

103
SECTION F I V E
SECTION FIVE
DRIVING SKILLS AND SAFETY TIPS
No driver manual can teach you how to operate a vehicle or be a safe driver.
Driving requires skills you can only gain through instruction and practice. The
following offers some basic driving information
BEFORE YOU DRIVE
Your safety and that of the public depends a lot on what you do before driving,
including adjusting the seat and mirrors, using safety belts, checking your vehicle,
maintaining a clear view, and securing items in and on the vehicle
Trip Planning
There are ways you can help reduce your driving costs. First, determine your
overall transportation needs. For each trip, determine if it is necessary. If so, there
may be times you do not need to drive yourself You might ride with someone else
or you could take public transportation if it is available
The best way to prolong the life of your car and save on fuel is to use it as little as
possible Trip planning can make your life easier and help cut down on your driving:
• Take public transportation when it is available; (800-652-DART)
www.dartfirststate.com
• Avoid driving during heavy traffic, it causes extra wear and tear on
you and the vehicle
• Use carpools or share rides whenever possible; (888-743-3628)
www.ridesharedelaware.org
• Plan and then combine your trips Make a list of the things you need
and the places you need to go Go to as many places as possible on
any one trip Try to reduce the number of places you need to go This
will cut down on the number of trips you need to take
• Call ahead to make sure that they have what you need or that what
you are picking up is ready
By doing these things you can help cut down on the amount of traffic on the road,
cut your travel costs, and save yourself time and effort
Check The Vehicle
How safely you can drive starts with the
vehicle you are driving. It is the duty of
drivers to make certain that the vehicles
they drive are safe to operate. A vehicle
that is in bad shape is unsafe and costs
more to run than one that is maintained
It can break down or cause a collision. If a
vehicle is in bad shape, you might not be
able to get out of an emergency situation
A vehicle in good shape can give you an
extra safety margin when you need it, and
you never know when you will need it

-- 103 of 151 --

104
You should follow your vehicle owner manual for routine maintenance. Some you
can do yourself and some must be done by a qualified mechanic. A few simple
checks will help prevent trouble on the road
Braking system – Only your brakes can stop your vehicle. It is very dangerous if
they are not working properly. If they do not seem to be working properly, are
making a lot of noise, smell funny, or the brake pedal goes to the floor, have a
mechanic check them
Lights – Make sure that turn signals, brake lights, taillights, and headlights are
operating properly These should be checked from the outside of the vehicle
Brake lights tell other road users that you are stopping, and turn signals tell them
you are turning
An out-of-alignment headlight can shine where it does not help you and may
blind other drivers. If you are having trouble seeing at night or if other drivers are
constantly flashing their headlights at you, have a mechanic check the headlights.
Windshield and wipers – Damaged glass can more easily break in a minor collision
or when something hits the windshield. Have a damaged windshield replaced.
Windshield wipers keep the rain and snow off the windshield. Some vehicles also
have wipers for rear windows and headlights Make sure all wipers are in good
operating condition. If the blades are not clearing water well, replace them.
Tires – Worn or bald tires can increase your stopping distance and make turning
more difficult when the road is wet. Unbalanced tires and low pressure cause
faster tire wear, reduce fuel economy, and make the vehicle harder to steer and
stop. If the vehicle bounces, the steering wheel shakes, or the vehicle pulls to one
side, have a mechanic check it
Worn tires can cause “hydroplaning,” and increase the chance of having a flat tire.
Check tire air pressure with an air pressure gauge when the tires are cold Check
the vehicle’s owner manual or the side of the tires for the proper pressure
Check the tread with a penny. Stick the penny into the tread “head” first. If the tread
does not come at least to Abe’s head, the tire is unsafe and you need to replace it.
Steering system – If the steering is not working properly, it is difficult to control
the direction you want to go. If the vehicle is hard to turn or does not turn when
the steering wheel is first turned, have the steering checked by a mechanic.
Suspension system – Your suspension helps you control your vehicle and provides
a comfortable ride over varying road surfaces. If the vehicle bounces a lot after a
bump or a stop or is hard to control, you may need new shocks or other suspension
parts. Have a mechanic check it out.
Exhaust system – The exhaust system helps reduce the noise from the engine,
helps cool the hot gases coming from running the engine, and moves these gases
to the rear of the vehicle Gases from a leaky exhaust can cause death inside a
vehicle in a very short time. Never run the motor in a closed garage. If you sit in a
vehicle with the motor running for a long time, open a window
Some exhaust leaks are easily heard, but many are not. This is why it is important
to have the exhaust system checked periodically

-- 104 of 151 --

105
SECTION F I V E
Engine compression device – No commercial vehicle equipped with an engine
compression brake device may be operated on a highway, including residential
streets, unless the vehicle is also equipped with a muffler in good working order
in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and in constant operation to
prevent excessive noise
Engine – A poorly running engine may lose power that is needed for normal driving
and emergencies, may not start, may get poor fuel economy, may pollute the air,
and could stop running when you are on the road causing you and traffic a problem.
Follow the procedures recommended in the vehicle’s owner manual for maintenance.
Loose objects – Make sure that there are no loose objects in the vehicle that could
hit someone in the event of a sudden stop or crash Make sure there are no objects
on the floor that could roll under the brake pedal and prevent you from stopping
the vehicle
Horn – The horn may not seem like it is important for safety, but as a warning
device, it could save your life Only use your horn as a warning to others
Secure Your Load
Driving with an unsecured load is extremely dangerous. A load must be securely
fastened and is only considered secure when nothing can slide, fall or shift onto
the roadway or become airborne
A 20 lb. object at 55 mph has a force of 1,000 lbs. at impact!
Here are some recommendations to properly secure your load in six easy steps:
1 Tie down load with rope, netting or straps
2 Tie large objects directly to the vehicle or trailer
3 Cover the entire load with a sturdy tarp or netting
4 Don’t overload the vehicle
5. Always double check load to make sure a load is secure
6. Secure Your Load as if your loved ones driving in the car behind you
For more information, go to www.secureyourload.com.
Clean Glass Surfaces
It is important that you are able to see clearly through the windows, windshield,
and mirrors
Here are some things you can do to help:
• Keep the windshield clean. Bright sun or headlights on a dirty
windshield make it hard to see. Carry liquid cleaner and a paper
or cloth towel so you can clean your windshield whenever it is
necessary
• Keep your window washer bottle full. Use antifreeze wash in areas
where the temperature could fall below freezing
• Keep the inside of your windows clean, especially if anyone has been
smoking in the vehicle. Smoking causes a film to build up on the
inside glass
• Clear snow, ice, or frost from all windows before driving Make sure

-- 105 of 151 --

106
you clean the front, sides, and back
• Do not hang things from your mirror or clutter up the windshield
with decals They could block your view
• Keep the headlights, backup, brake, and taillights clean. Dirt on the
lenses can reduce the light by 50%
Adjust Seat And Mirrors
You should always check your seat and mirrors before you start to drive Make any
adjustments to the seat and mirrors before you drive off
• Adjust your seat so that you are high enough to clearly see the road. If
necessary, use a seat cushion Do not move the seat so far forward that
you cannot easily steer. Seating should be positioned approximately
12 inches from the steering wheel
• Adjust your rearview mirror and side mirrors. You should be able to
see out the back window with the rearview mirror and to see out the
side windows with the side mirrors. A good adjustment for the side
mirrors is to set them so that when you lean forward slightly, you can
see just the side of your vehicle
• If you have a day/night mirror, make sure it is set for the time of day
you are driving
• Head restraints are designed to prevent whip lash if you are hit from
behind They should be adjusted so the head restraint contacts the
back of your head
Use Safety Belts
Before you drive away, always fasten your
safety belts properly and make sure all
your passengers are using safety belts
or child restraints. Delaware law requires
all occupants of a motor vehicle to wear
seatbelts 	Current statistics show that
over 90% of Delawareans buckle up
A law enforcement officer may pull a
vehicle over if they see an unrestrained
or improperly restrained occupant inside
Putting the shoulder belt under your arm
or behind you can result in serious injury;
and, because it is not considered proper
safety belt use, could result in a ticket
being issued
It 	is 	important 	that 	you 	and 	your
passengers use safety belts. Studies have
shown that you can cut your chance of
dying or being seriously injured in a crash
nearly in half by simply wearing your seatbelt
Wearing either part alone greatly reduces your protection. If you have an automatic
shoulder belt, be sure to buckle your lap belt as well Otherwise, in a collision you
could slide out of the belt and be hurt or killed. Fatal crashes can occur at any
speed
 	HBucklebear H
Position: Passenger

-- 106 of 151 --

107
SECTION F I V E
In addition to protecting you from injury as a driver by preventing your ejection
from the vehicle, safety belts help you keep control of the vehicle. If you are struck
from the side or make a quick turn, the force could push you sideways. You cannot
steer the vehicle if you are not behind the wheel
Safety belts must be worn even if the vehicle is equipped with air bags. While
air bags are good protection against hitting the steering wheel, dashboard, or
windshield, they do not protect you if you are hit from the side or rear, or if the
vehicle rolls over. And, an air bag will not keep you behind the wheel in these
situations. Safety belts and air bags are designed to work together, and injuries
may occur if safety belts are not used in air bag-equipped vehicles.
Use Child Restraints (Car Seats)
Delaware law requires:
• Children under age 2 AND 30
pounds to ride in a rear-facing car
seat
• Children under age 4 AND 40 pounds
to ride in a harnessed car seat
• Children in belt positioning booster
seats to remain in their belt positioning
booster seat until reaching the height
or weight maximum listed by the
booster seat manufacturer
• Children who have reached the upper height and weight limits per
the manufacturer’s guidelines of a belt positioning booster seat and
has not yet attained the age of 16 shall, in all seating positions, wear
a properly secured seatbelt This is a primary enforcement law, which
means officers can pull a vehicle over if they see an unrestrained child
inside. A child under the age of 12 or under 5’5” should not occupy the
front passenger seat of a vehicle Certain exceptions may be made
which are located in Delaware code Title 21, Section 4803(b)(1) and
(2).
Proper Restraint of Child
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommend the following for properly securing
children in car seats:
• Birth - 12 Months: Children under the age of 1 should always ride in
a rear-facing car seat There are different types of rear-facing car
seats: infant-only seats can only be used rear-facing; convertible and
all-in-one car seats typically have higher height and weight limits for
rear-facing mode, allowing you to keep your child rear-facing for a
longer period of time
• 1 - 3 Years: Keep your child rear-facing for as long as possible. It’s
the best way to keep them safe Your child should remain in a rear-
facing car seat until they reach the top height or weight limit allowed
for by your car seat’s manufacturer for rear-facing mode Once the
rear-facing car seat is outgrown, your child is ready to travel in a
forward-facing car seat with a harness
• 4 - 7 Years: Keep your 4- to 7-year-old children in a forward-facing
car seat with a harness until they reach the top height or weight limit

-- 107 of 151 --

108
allowed by your car seat’s manufacturer for forward-facing mode
Once they outgrow their forward-facing car seat with a harness, it’s
time to travel in a booster seat
• 8 -12 Years: Keep your 8- to 12-year-old children in a booster seat
until they are big enough to fit the adult seat belt properly. For a
seat belt to fit properly the lap belt must lie snugly across the upper
thighs, not the stomach The shoulder belt should lie snug across the
shoulder and chest and not cross the neck or face. Remember: your
child should still ride in the back seat because it’s safer there
Other tips:
• The best car seat is the car seat that fits your child, fits your vehicle,
and that you can use correctly every time
• Never install a rear-facing car seat in front of an active frontal air bag.
• Harness straps should fit snugly. You should not be able to pinch
excess webbing of the harness between your fingers when you try to
pinch the harness straps at the child’s collarbone
• The chest clip should be even with the child’s arm pits
• Once installed, car seats should not move more than one inch side-to-
side and front-to-back when checked at the belt path with moderate
force
• For forward-facing car seat installations, use the top tether whenever
possible, whether you are installing with lower anchors or with the
seat belt
• Never try to hold a child on your lap unrestrained. The safest place for
children to ride is in an appropriate car seat
It is very important that you read your vehicle’s owner manual and your car seat
manual Proper use and installation of car seats has a direct correlation to crash
injury outcomes, even in a minor crash
The Delaware Office of Highway Safety provides free car seat checks, which are
one-on-one appointments for caregivers who need help with proper installation
of their car seat and harnessing of their children in their car seats. Certified Child
Passenger Safety Technicians will check your car seat for correct installation and
proper harnessing of your child. Please visit their website at https://ohs.delaware.
gov/carseat.shtml for additional information.
The Delaware Office of Highway Safety has car seat fitting stations in all three

-- 108 of 151 --

109
SECTION F I V E
counties. A fitting station is a year-round location where caregivers can get their
car seats checked for proper use. Appointments are required at all locations. To
make an appointment, please call or text the fitting station of your choice:
• New Castle County (302) 256-1123
• Kent County (302) 387-2324
• Sussex County (302) 242-7107
Warning! When it’s hot outside, do not leave children or animals unattended.
On a hot summer day the interior of a car can get dangerously hot One study found
that with the windows up and the temperature outside at 94 degrees, the inside of a
car could be 122 degrees in just half an hour or 132 degrees after an hour
Prevent an unnecessary tragedy and make sure no one leaves small children or
animals in a hot vehicle unattended
Bad Information
Some people still have “bad information” about using safety belts. For example,
“Safety belts can trap you inside a car.” It takes less than a second to undo a
safety belt. Crashes where a vehicle catches fire or sinks in deep water and you are
trapped, seldom happen Even if they do, a safety belt may keep you from being
knocked out Your chance to escape will be better if you are conscious
“Safety belts are good on long trips, but I do not need them if I am driving around
town.” Over half of all traffic deaths happen within 25 miles of home. Many of them
occur on roads posted at less then 45 mph
“Some people are thrown clear in a crash and walk away with hardly a scratch.”
Your chances of not being killed in a crash are much better if you stay inside the
vehicle. Safety belts can keep you from being thrown out of your vehicle into the
path of another one. Staying inside the vehicle will definitely reduce injuries.
“If I get hit from the side, I am better off being thrown across the car; away from
the crash point.” When a vehicle is struck from the side, it will move sideways
Everything in the vehicle that is not fastened down, including the passengers, will
effectively slide toward the point of crash, not away from it
“At slow speeds, I can brace myself.” Even at 25 mph, the force of a head-on

-- 109 of 151 --

110
crash is the same as pedaling a bicycle full-speed into a brick wall or diving off a
three-story building onto the sidewalk. No one can brace for that.
An individual’s constitutional and other legal rights during a traffic stop
In accordance with 11 Del. C. §1902 an individual must provide their name, address
and an explanation as to why they are driving on the roadway and where they are
going. Similarly, passengers in a vehicle must also provide their information and/
or exit the vehicle, if requested to do so by the officer. An individual may ask the
officer to identify them self and the agency that employs them.
An individual’s vehicle may be searched on-scene if consent is provided to the
officer to do so, if the officer believes they have probable cause to do so, or as
part of an inventory assessment of a vehicle that is being towed During roadside
investigations a person does not have a right to an attorney; however, that right
will present itself later in the process
Laws regarding questioning and detention by a law-enforcement
officer, proof of identity and consequences for failure to comply
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a public street or highway of this State
if they do not have a license to operate it. Failure to have the proper license or
endorsement may lead to, at a minimum, fines and/or the loss of driving privileges.
A person who fails to provide identification or who fails to explain their actions
to the satisfaction of the officer, may be detained, further questioned, and
investigated. A detention does not mean a person is under arrest. At the end of
the detention period, which may not exceed two hours, the person will either be
released, or arrested and charged with a crime You may refer to 11 Del C §1902,
21 Del C §2701 and 21 Del C §2721 for additional information
The role and procedures of a law-enforcement officer in general and
during a traffic stop
An officer will initiate a traffic stop by giving a visible or audible signal, which
could include using their emergency lights or sirens. The officer may approach
your vehicle from either the driver or passenger side, identify themself and their
agency, and state the reason for the traffic stop. Many times the officer will ask the
driver if they have any reason for committing the traffic violation.
Driving a motor vehicle is a privilege, not a right To comply with the law both the
operator and the vehicle they are driving need to satisfy certain requirements. One
of the roles of an officer is to enforce those safety requirements. The officer will
ask for your driver license, proof of insurance, and vehicle registration. The officer
may ask a series of questions. The officer may return to their vehicle to conduct
inquires. You and your passengers should remain in your vehicle at all times unless
instructed otherwise by the officer.
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law Enforcement
Law enforcement officers conduct traffic stops because they observe a traffic
violation or are conducting a police investigation Being stopped by a law
enforcement officer can be a stressful experience but knowing what to do during
the stop will help ensure your safety, the safety of other motorists, and the safety
of the officer. When you see emergency lights behind you, stay calm, activate
your turn signal, and pull off or to the side of the roadway as soon and safely
as possible When pulling over for an emergency vehicle, movements should be
made to the right side of the roadway, whenever possible Turn off the ignition
and radio and stay in your vehicle unless directed by the officer to exit. Keep your
hands on the steering wheel so they are easily observable. Ask your passengers

-- 110 of 151 --

111
SECTION F I V E
to remain calm and to stay in the vehicle while keeping their hands in plain view
as well. Give the officer your full attention. Cell phones and mobile devices should
not be used by you or any of your passengers Do not make sudden moves or
search for your driver’s license or vehicle documents – wait for the officer to give
you instructions. If you have a weapon(s) in the vehicle, inform the officer upon
first contact. If it’s nighttime, the officer may direct a spotlight at your vehicle
once stopped
How and where to file a compliment on behalf of or a complaint against
a law-enforcement officer
You should contact the officer’s agency via means determined by such agency.
Most agencies have a website with contact information
It is the goal of law enforcement to protect the public and conduct traffic stops in
a manner that protects the safety of everyone involved Your cooperation with law
enforcement is the best way to ensure that your safety, and that of others, is not
compromised during the stop
BASIC DRIVING
Starting
Check the vehicle’s owner manual for how to best start the vehicle Make sure
the parking brake is on before you start the vehicle. If the vehicle has a manual
transmission, it must not be in gear, and in some vehicles, the clutch must be
depressed. For a vehicle that has an automatic transmission, you must put the shift
selector in “park.”
Accelerating
Accelerate gradually and smoothly. Trying to start too fast can cause the drive
wheels to spin, particularly on slippery surfaces, and cause the vehicle to slide
With a manual-shift vehicle, practice using the clutch and accelerator so that the
engine does not over-rev or stall when shifting between gears
Steering
Both hands should be placed on opposite
sides of the steering wheel (e.g., left hand
between 8 and 10 o’clock and right hand
between 2 and 4 o’clock). This position is
comfortable, and on high speed roads it
allows you to make turns without taking
your hands off the wheel
Be sure to look well down the road and
on both sides of the road, not just at the
road in front of your vehicle. Look for traffic
situations where you will need to steer
before you get to them This way, you have
time to steer smoothly and safely
When turning sharp corners, turn the steering wheel using the “hand-over-hand”
technique. When you complete a turn, straighten out the steering wheel by hand.
Letting it slip through your fingers could be dangerous.

-- 111 of 151 --

112
Speeding
The best way not to speed is to know how fast you are going Check the
speedometer often People are not very good at judging how fast they are going
It is easy to be traveling much faster than you think. This is especially true when
you leave high speed roads and are driving on much slower local roads
Follow the speed limit signs. They are there for your safety.
Stopping
Be alert so that you know when you will have to stop well ahead of time. Stopping
suddenly is dangerous and usually points to a driver who was not paying attention
When you brake quickly, you could skid and lose control of your vehicle. You also
make it harder for drivers behind you to stop without hitting you
Try to avoid panic stops by seeing events well in advance By slowing down or
changing lanes, you may not have to stop at all, and if you do, you can make a
more gradual and safer stop

-- 112 of 151 --

113
SECTION F I V E
In emergency or slippery
conditions without Anti-
Lock Braking System, all
wheels lock; car skids
and is unsteerable.
In emergency or slippery
conditions with Anti-Lock
Braking System, wheels
don’t lock; car is stable
and remains steerable.
Braking
Newer automobiles and trucks are equipped with Anti-Lock Brake Systems (ABS),
which prevent vehicles from locking wheels and skidding in emergency or slippery
conditions. With ABS you should brake as hard as possible and, if necessary, steer
to avoid crashing. Without ABS, you should brake as hard as possible without
locking the wheels
Seeing Well
Most of what you do in driving depends on what you see To be a good driver, you
need to see well The single biggest contributor to crashes is failing to see what
is happening You must look down the road, to the sides, and behind your vehicle
and be alert for unexpected events. At night and at other times when it’s hard to
see, you must use your headlights
You must be alert to what is going on around you Many crashes occur because
drivers do not pay enough attention to their driving Do not take your eyes off the
road for more than a few seconds at any one time. If you need to look at a map,
pull safely off the road before you try to look at it Do not try to read the map
Delaware’s Law Enforcement Agencies...
will be out in force to stop and ticket those individuals who
carelessly endanger our lives each and every day.
YOU CAN ASSIST US BY:
• Remaining Calm
• Not Taking Traffic Problems Personally
• Avoiding Eye Contact with Aggressive Drivers
• Not Challenging Them
• Staying Away from Erratic Drivers
ADDITIONALLY, you can help make Delaware’s roadways safer by
reporting aggressive driving with your cellular phone Get their tag number
and report it
CALL 911

-- 113 of 151 --

114
while you are driving. In many crashes with motorcycles, bicycles, and pedestrians,
drivers reported that they looked but did not see them. If you have a cellular
phone or CB radio, avoid using it when the vehicle is in motion Even with “hands
free” equipment, conversing on a phone or radio takes your attention away from
driving and can cause you to be less likely to notice a dangerous situation
Do not drive with head or earphones that cover or go in both ears This is illegal
in Delaware and many other states because it makes it hard to hear emergency
horns or sirens
Do not slow down just to look at a crash, someone getting a ticket, or other
roadside activity (rubbernecking). This could cause you to be in a crash. If you
take your eyes off the road to look at something, you could run into a vehicle
ahead that has slowed or stopped. Rubbernecking also can increase congestion.
When you pass these roadside activities, keep your eyes on the road and get past
them as soon and as safely as you can
Scanning
To be a good driver, you must know what is happening around your vehicle You
must look ahead, to the sides, and behind the vehicle. Scanning helps you to see
problems ahead, vehicles and people that may be in the road by the time you
reach them, signs warning of problems ahead, and signs giving you directions
Look ahead – In order to avoid last-minute braking or the need to turn, you should
look well down the road By looking ahead and being ready to stop or change lanes
if needed, you can drive more safely, save fuel, help keep traffic moving at a steady
pace, and allow yourself time to better see around your vehicle and alongside the
road. Looking well down the road will also help you to steer straighter with less
weaving. Safer drivers tend to look at least 10 seconds ahead of their vehicle. How
far is this? It is the distance that your vehicle will travel in 10 seconds.
In the city, 10 seconds is about one block. When you drive in city traffic, you should
try to look at least one block ahead On the highway, 10 seconds is about four city
blocks or a quarter of a mile.
Do you know how many seconds you are looking ahead? Here is how to figure how
far ahead you are looking
1. Find a non-moving object like a sign or telephone pole near the road
about as far ahead as you are looking
2. Start counting: one-one-thousand, two-one-thousand, three-one-
thousand, etc , until you reach the object
3 The number of seconds you have counted is the number of seconds
ahead that you were looking

-- 114 of 151 --

115
SECTION F I V E
You can be a safer driver by looking well ahead You can avoid the need to stop
or turn quickly. The less you have to stop or turn quickly, the less likely you are to
run into someone or have someone run into you
By looking well ahead, you can save fuel. Every time you have to stop quickly, it
takes time and fuel to get your vehicle back up to speed Drivers who look ahead,
can slow down gradually or change lanes and avoid unnecessary braking that
leads to lower miles per gallon
Traffic would flow more smoothly if everyone looked well ahead. Making driving
changes before the last moment gives drivers behind you more time to react The
earlier you act, the less often someone behind you has to react quickly to your
vehicle By seeing needed driving changes early, you can drive more safely, and
that helps drivers behind you drive more safely too. It also keeps traffic moving at
a steady pace
Look to the sides – As other vehicles or pedestrians may cross or enter your
path anytime, you should look to the sides to make sure no one is coming This is
especially true at intersections and railroad crossings
Intersections – Intersections are any place where traffic merges or crosses. They
include: cross streets, side streets, driveways, and shopping center or parking lot
entrances Before you enter an intersection, look to both the left and right for
approaching vehicles and/or crossing pedestrians. If stopped, look to both the left
and right just before you start moving. Look across the intersection before you
start to move to make sure the path is clear all the way through the intersection,
and you will not block it if you have to stop
Before you turn left across oncoming traffic, look for a safe gap in the traffic. Look
to the street you are turning onto to make sure that no vehicles or pedestrians are
in your path, leaving you stranded in the path of oncoming traffic. Look one more
time in the direction of oncoming traffic before you turn.
Before turning right, make sure that there is no traffic approaching from your left
and no oncoming traffic turning left into your path. Do not begin your turn without
checking for pedestrians crossing where you will be turning You may turn right on
red unless prohibited You may also turn left from a one-way street onto another
one-way street unless prohibited
Do not rely on traffic signals or signs to tell you that no one will be crossing in front
of you. Some drivers do not obey traffic signals or signs. At an intersection, look
left and right, even if other traffic has a red light or a stop sign. This is especially
important just after the light has turned green This is when people on the cross
street are most likely to hurry through the intersection before the light changes
to red Others who may not stop are individuals who have been drinking or other
reckless drivers
Make sure you can clearly see crossing traffic before entering an intersection. If
you were stopped and your view of a cross street is blocked, edge forward slowly
until you can see By moving forward slowly, crossing drivers can see the front of
your vehicle before you can see them This gives them a chance to slow down and
warn you if needed
Whenever there is a lot of activity along the side of the road, there is a good chance
that someone will cross or enter the road Therefore, it is very important to look to
the sides when you are near shopping centers and parking lots, construction areas,
busy sidewalks, and playgrounds and school yards

-- 115 of 151 --

116
Railroad crossings – As you approach any railroad crossing, slow down and look
up and down the tracks to make sure a train is not coming Do not assume that a
train is not coming even if you have never seen one at that crossing before. Always
expect a train. Assuming that a train is not coming is one of the leading causes of
fatalities at railroad crossings Make sure there is room for your vehicle on the far
side before you cross the tracks Do not block the crossing
At crossings with more than one track, wait until the passing train is well down the
track before starting to cross. Another train may be hidden by the one that just
passed
Look behind - Besides watching traffic ahead of you, you must check traffic
behind you. You need to check more often when traffic is heavy. This is the only
way you will know if someone is following too closely or coming up too fast and
will give you time to do something about it. It is very important to look for vehicles
behind you when you change lanes, slow down, back up, or are driving down a
long or steep hill
When changing lanes - Whenever you want to change lanes, you must check that
there are no vehicles in the lane you want to enter This means you must check
for traffic to the side and behind your vehicle before you change lanes. Changing
lanes includes: changing from one lane to another, merging onto a roadway from
an entrance ramp, and entering the roadway from the curb or shoulder When
changing lanes, you should:
• Signal your intention
to change lanes
• Look 	in 	your
rearview 	and 	side
mirrors 	Make 	sure
there are no vehicles
in the lane you want
to enter 	Make sure
that no one or vehicle
is about to pass you
• Look over your shoulder in the direction you plan to move. Be sure
no one is near the rear corners of your vehicle These areas are
called “blind spots” because you cannot see them through your
mirrors You must turn your head and look to see vehicles in your
blind spot
• Check quickly. Do not take your eyes off the road ahead for more
than an instant. Traffic ahead of you could stop suddenly while you
are checking traffic to the sides, rear, or over your shoulder. Also,
use your mirrors to check traffic while you are preparing to change
lanes, merge, or pull onto the roadway This way you can keep an
eye on vehicles ahead of you at the same time Check over your
shoulder just before you change lanes for traffic in your blind spot.
Look several times if you need to so as not to look for too long a
period at any one time. You must keep track of what traffic is doing
in front of you and in the lane you are entering
• Check the far lane Be sure to check the far lane, if there is one, as
someone in that lane may be planning to move into the same lane
you want to enter
• Check for other road users. Remember that there are other road
users such as motorcycles, bicycles, and pedestrians that are harder

-- 116 of 151 --

117
SECTION F I V E
to see than cars and trucks Be especially alert when you are entering
the roadway from the curb or driveway
When you slow down – You must check behind your vehicle whenever you slow
down. This is very important when you slow down quickly or at points where a
following driver would not expect you to slow down, such as private driveways or
parking spaces
When you back up – It is hard for you to see behind your vehicle. Try to do as little
backing as possible. In a shopping center, try to find a parking space you can drive
through, so you can drive forward when you leave Where backing is necessary,
here are some hints that will help you back your vehicle safely
• Check behind your vehicle before you get in Children or small
objects cannot be seen from the driver’s seat
• Place your right arm on the back of the seat and turn around so that
you can look directly through the rear window Do not depend on your
rearview or side mirrors as you cannot see directly behind your vehicle
• Back slowly, your vehicle is much harder to steer while you are
backing
• Whenever possible use a person outside the vehicle to help you
reverse or back up
When going down a long or steep hill – Check your mirrors when you are going
down hills or mountains. Vehicles often build up speed going down a steep grade.
Be alert for large trucks and buses that may be going too fast
Using Your Lights
It is much harder to see at night. Here are some things you can do that will help
you see better:
• Use your high beams whenever there are no oncoming vehicles
High beams let you see twice as far as low beams. It is important to
use high beams on unfamiliar roads, in construction areas, or where
there may be people along the side of the road
• Dim your high beams whenever you come within about a one-block
distance of an oncoming vehicle (within 500 feet by Delaware law).
• Use your low beams when following another vehicle or when in
heavy traffic.
• Use the low beams in fog or when it is snowing or raining hard. Light
from high beams will reflect back, causing glare and making it more
difficult to see ahead. Some vehicles have fog lights that you should
also use under these conditions
• You must turn on your lights in rain, mist, and snow, and at any time
you have your wipers on. It’s the law in Delaware.
• Do not drive at any time with only your parking lights on Parking
lights are for parking only. If a vehicle comes toward you with high
beams on, flash your headlights quickly a couple of times.
• If the driver fails to dim the lights, look toward the right side of the
road This will keep you from being blinded by the other vehicle’s
headlights and allow you to see enough of the edge of the road
to stay on course. Do not try to “get back” at the other driver by
keeping your bright lights on. If you do, both of you may be blinded.

-- 117 of 151 --

118
COMMUNICATING
Letting Others Know You Are There
Crashes often happen because one driver does not see another driver, or when
one driver does something the other driver does not expect. It is important that
drivers let other road users know they are there and what they plan to do
Use headlights – Besides helping you to see at night, headlights help other people
see you. If needed, flick your headlights to alert other road users you are there.
• On rainy, snowy, or foggy days, it is sometimes hard for other drivers
to see your vehicle. In these conditions, headlights make your vehicle
easier to see. Remember, if you turn on your wipers, turn on your
headlights. It’s the law in Delaware and some other states.
• Turn on your headlights when it begins to get dark Even if you turn
them on a little early, you will help other drivers see you
• Whenever driving and lights are necessary, use your headlights
Parking lights are for parked vehicles only
• When driving away from a rising or setting sun, turn on your
headlights Drivers coming towards you may have trouble seeing
your vehicle Your headlights will help them see you
Use your horn – People cannot see you unless they are looking your way Your
horn can get their attention. Use it whenever it will help prevent a crash. If there
is no immediate danger, a light tap on the horn should be all you need Give your
horn a light tap:
• When a person on foot or on a bike appears to be moving into your
lane of travel
• When you are passing a driver who starts to turn into your lane
• When a driver is not paying attention or may have trouble seeing
you
• When coming to a place where you cannot see what is ahead – like
a steep hill, a sharp curve, or exiting a narrow alley
If there is danger, do not be afraid to sound a sharp blast on your horn. Do this:
• When a child or older person is about to walk, run, or ride into the
street
• When another vehicle is in danger of hitting you
• When you have lost control of your vehicle and are moving towards
someone
When not to use your horn – There are several occasions when you should not use
your horn They include:
• Encouraging someone to drive faster or get out of the way
• Apprising other drivers of an error.
• Greeting a friend
• Around blind pedestrians.

-- 118 of 151 --

119
SECTION F I V E
Use emergency signals – If your vehicle breaks down on a highway, make sure
that other drivers can see it. All too often crashes occur because a driver did not
see a stalled vehicle until it was too late to stop
If available, use your 2-way radio or telephone to notify authorities that your
vehicle or someone else has broken down Many roadways have signs that tell you
the CB channel or telephone number to call in an emergency. If you are having
vehicle trouble and have to stop:
• Get your vehicle off the road and away from traffic if at all possible.
• Turn on your emergency flashers to show you are having trouble.
• Try to stop where other drivers have a clear view of your vehicle if
you cannot get your vehicle off the roadway. (Do not stop just over
a hill or just around a curve.)
• Try to warn other road users that your vehicle is there Place
emergency flares behind the vehicle. This allows other drivers to
change lanes if necessary
• If you do not have emergency flares or other warning devices, stand
by the side of the road where you are safe from traffic and wave
traffic around your vehicle. Use a white cloth if you have one.
• Never stand in the roadway. Do not try to change a tire if it means
you have to be in a traffic lane.
• Lift the hood or tie a white cloth to the antenna, side mirror or door
handle to signal an emergency
Stay out of the blind spot - Drive your vehicle where others can see you Do not
drive in another vehicle’s blind spot
• Try to avoid driving on either side and slightly to the rear of another
vehicle You will be in their blind spot Either speed up or drop back
so the other driver can see your vehicle more easily
• When passing another vehicle, get through the other driver’s blind
spot as quickly as you can. The longer you stay there, the longer you
are in danger of them turning into you
• Never stay alongside a large vehicle such as a truck or bus. These
vehicles have large blind spots, and it’s hard for drivers of large
vehicles to see you

-- 119 of 151 --

120
Let Others Know What You Are Doing
Generally, other drivers expect you to keep doing what you are doing You must
warn them when you are going to change direction or slow down This will give
them time to react if needed, or at least not to be surprised by what you do
Signal when you change direction - Signaling gives other drivers time to react to
your moves You should use your turn signals before you change lanes, turn right
or left, merge into traffic, or park.
• Get into the habit of signaling every time you change direction
Signal even when you do not see anyone else around. It is easy to
miss someone who needs to know what you are doing
• Signal as early as you can. Try and signal at least three seconds
before you make your move, although Delaware law states you must
signal for at least 300 feet before turning
• Be careful that you do not signal too early. If there are streets,
driveways, or entrances between you and where you want to turn,
wait until you have passed them to signal
• If another vehicle is about to enter the street between you and where
you plan to turn, wait until you have passed it to signal your turn. If
you signal earlier, the other driver may think you plan to turn where
they are, and they might pull into your path
• After you have made a turn or lane change, make sure your turn
signal is off. After small turns, the signals may not turn off by
themselves. Turn the signal off if it does not click off by itself. If you
don’t, others might think you plan to turn again
Signal when you slow down - Your brake lights let people know that you are
slowing down. Always slow down as early as it is safe to do so. If you are going
to stop or slow down at a place where another driver does not expect it, tap your
brake pedal three or four times quickly to let those behind you know you are about
to slow down. Signal when you slow down:
• To turn off a roadway which does not have separate turn or exit lanes
• To park or turn just before an intersection
• To avoid something in the road or stopped or slowing traffic that a
driver behind you cannot see
You must make a hand and arm signal or use your electrical directional (turn)
signal or both continuously for at least 300 feet before turning You should signal
for a much greater distance (longer time interval) when traveling at a high speed.
This is particularly important when changing lanes on all express highways such
as the interstate system

-- 120 of 151 --

121
SECTION F I V E
ADJUSTING SPEED
The faster your vehicle is going, the more distance it will take to turn, slow, or stop
For example, stopping at 60 mph does not take twice the distance it takes at 30
mph as one might think, but over three times the distance Driving safely means
adjusting your speed for road and traffic conditions, how well you can see, and
obeying speed limits
Adjusting To Road Conditions
There are various road conditions where to be safe, you must slow down. For
example, you must slow down before a sharp curve, when the roadway is slippery,
and when there is standing water on the road
The only contact your vehicle has with the road is through the tires. How good a
grip the tires have with the road depends on the type and condition of the tires
and the type and condition of the road surface
Many drivers do not pay enough attention to the condition of their tires or to the
condition of the roadway. It is important that the tires be in good condition and
have enough air in them. See the vehicle’s owner manual for correct tire pressure.
You do not have as much traction on gravel or dirt roads as you do on concrete or
asphalt roads. When driving on gravel or dirt, you must slow down. It will take you
much longer to stop, and it is much easier to skid when turning
Curves - A vehicle can travel much faster in a straight line than it can in a curve. It
is easy to go too fast in a curve. If you go too fast, then the tires will not be able
to grip the road and the vehicle will skid. Always slow down before you enter the
curve so you do not have to brake in the curve Braking in a curve can cause the
vehicle to skid
Slippery roads - Slow down at the first sign of rain, snow, or sleet. These all make
the roadway slippery When the road is slippery, the vehicle’s tires do not grip as
well as they do on a dry road. How slow should you go? On a wet road you should
reduce your speed about 10 mph On packed snow you should cut your speed in
half Use snow tires or chains when the road has snow on it On ice, you must slow
to a “crawl”. It is very dangerous to drive on ice.
If at all possible, do not drive when the roads are icy. In some areas where there is a
lot of icy weather, special studded tires are allowed Because these tires can cause
road damage, they are not allowed in many areas, or on certain roads, or during
summer months. (See Prohibited Equipment)
Some road surfaces are slippery at certain times or places. Here are some clues to
help you spot slippery roads:
• On cold, wet days shady spots can be icy. These areas freeze first
and dry out last
• Overpasses and other types of bridges can have icy spots The
pavement on bridges can be icy even when other pavement is not
This is because bridges can be colder than other roadways
• When the temperature is around the freezing point, ice can become
wet This makes conditions more slippery than at temperatures well
below freezing
• If it starts to rain on a hot day, pavement can be very slippery for the

-- 121 of 151 --

122
first few minutes. Heat causes the oil in the asphalt to come to the
surface The road is more slippery until the oil is washed off
Water on the roadway - When it is raining or the road is wet, most tires have good
traction up to about 35 mph. However, as you go faster, your tires will start to ride
up on the water, like water skis. This is called “hydroplaning.” In a heavy rain, your
tires can lose all traction with the road at about 50 mph Bald or badly worn tires
will lose traction at much lower speeds The best way to keep from hydroplaning
is to slow down in the rain or when the road is wet
If it feels like your tires have lost traction with the surface of the road you should:
• Ease your foot off the gas pedal
• Keep the steering wheel straight. Only try to turn if it’s an emergency.
If you must turn, do it slowly, or you will cause your vehicle to skid.
• Do not try to stop or turn until your tires are gripping the road again
If you must drive in slippery conditions, review “Dealing with Skids” in the
Emergencies section at the back of this manual
Adjusting To Traffic
Vehicles moving in the same direction at the same speed cannot hit one another.
Crashes involving two or more vehicles often happen when drivers go faster or
slower than other vehicles on the road
Keep pace with traffic – If you are going faster than traffic, you will have to keep
passing others Each time you pass someone, there is a chance for a collision
The vehicle you are passing may change lanes suddenly; or on a two-lane road
an oncoming vehicle may appear suddenly. Slow down and keep pace with other
traffic. Speeding does not save more than a few minutes an hour.
Going much slower than other vehicles can be just as bad as speeding. It tends
to make vehicles bunch up behind you and causes the other traffic to pass you. If
vehicles are piled up behind you, pull over when safe to do so and let them pass
You should either drive faster or consider using roads with slower speeds
Entering into traffic – When you merge with traffic, try to enter at the same speed
that traffic is moving. High-speed roadways generally have ramps to give you time
to build up your speed Use the ramp to reach the speed of other vehicles before
you pull onto the road Do not drive to the end of the ramp and stop or you will not
have enough room to get up to the speed of traffic. Also, drivers behind you will
not expect you to stop. If they are watching the traffic on the main road, you may
be hit from the rear. If you have to wait for space to enter a roadway, slow down
on the ramp so you have some room to speed up before you merge
Leaving traffic – Keep up with the speed of traffic as long as you are on the main
road. If the road you are traveling has exit ramps, do not slow down until you move
onto the exit ramp When you turn from a high speed, two-lane roadway, try not to
slow down too early if you have traffic following you. Tap your brakes and reduce
your speed quickly but safely, and remember to signal.
Slow moving traffic – Some vehicles cannot travel very fast or have trouble
keeping up with the speed of traffic. If you spot these vehicles early, you have
time to change lanes or slow down safely. Slowing suddenly can cause a traffic
crash

-- 122 of 151 --

123
SECTION F I V E
• Watch for large trucks and small underpowered cars on steep grades
or when they are entering traffic. They can lose speed on long or
steep hills, and it takes longer for these vehicles to get up to speed
when they enter traffic.
• Farm tractors, animal-drawn vehicles, and roadway maintenance
vehicles usually go 25 mph or less These vehicles should have a
slow-moving vehicle decal (an orange triangle) on the back.
Trouble spots – Wherever people or traffic gather, your room to maneuver is
limited You need to lower your speed to have time to react in a crowded space
Here are some of the places where you may need to slow down:
• Shopping centers, parking lots, and downtown areas – These are
busy areas with vehicles and people stopping, starting, and moving
in different directions
• Rush hours – Rush hours often have heavy traffic and drivers that
always seem to be in a hurry
• Narrow bridges and tunnels – Vehicles approaching each other in
these areas are closer together
• Toll plazas – Vehicles are changing lanes and preparing to stop and
then speeding up again when leaving the plaza The number of lanes
could change both before and after the plaza
• Schools, playgrounds, and residential streets – These areas often
have children present. Always be alert for children crossing the
street, running, or riding into the street without looking
• Railroad crossings – You need to make sure that there are no trains
coming and that you have room to cross. Some crossings are bumpy,
so you need to slow down to safely cross Do not block the crossing
NIGHT DRIVING
Night driving is always more difficult and dangerous than day driving. Per mile
driven, the fatal crash rate at night throughout the nation is two-and-one-half
times as high as during the day. At night the driver does not see as far, as soon, or
as much, and everything has a different appearance
The glare of oncoming headlights greatly increases the difficulty, especially for
older drivers The glare causes the pupils of the eyes to contract, and it takes time
for them to readjust to less intense light During this recovery period you may be
driving as though blind
You can make your night driving safer in these ways:
• Most important of all, don’t over drive your headlights
• Keep your speed low enough to be able to stop in the distance you
can see ahead
• When passing vehicles, do not stare at their headlights. Use quick glances to:
° Learn lane position of oncoming vehicles.
° Learn your own position.
° Be certain of the right edge of road
° Look ahead for objects in your path.

-- 123 of 151 --

124
DRIVE DEFENSIVELY
Don’t trust the other driver to do what you think they are going to do, or what
you would do in his place. For example, when their turn signal is flashing, don’t
assume that they will make a turn Plan ahead and decide what to do if they don’t
turn as well as if they do turn Don’t assume that every driver will stop when there
is a stop sign or a red traffic light. Some drivers deliberately “run” stop signs and
traffic lights; others may be daydreaming.
You should constantly be thinking of an “escape route” as you drive. After a few
weeks of practice, this will become second nature Then, if a sudden emergency
arises, you will have a plan of action ready. For instance, if you see an approaching
vehicle start to pass and you think they may not have room, slow down. Also, by
having studied the shoulder and nearby area, you will know where you can go if
necessary The same consideration applies to curves, bridges, and hills
HOW WELL CAN YOU SEE?
If something is in your path and you need to stop, you need to see it in time to be
able to stop. It takes much longer and further to stop than many people think. If
your vehicle has good tires, brakes, and dry pavement:
• At 50 mph, it can take about 400 feet to react to something you see
and bring your vehicle to a stop That is about the length of a city
block
• At 30 mph, it can take about 200 feet to stop. That is almost half
a city block in length. If you cannot see 400 feet ahead, it means
you may not be driving safely at 50 mph. If you cannot see 200 feet
ahead, you may not be driving safely at 30 mph By the time you see
an object in your path, it may be too late to stop without hitting it
Here are some things that limit how well you can see and hints you can follow to
be a safer driver
Darkness
It is harder to see at night. You must be closer to an object to see it at night
than during the day You must be able to stop within the distance you can see
ahead with your headlights Your headlights will let you see about 350 feet
ahead You should drive at a speed that allows you to stop within this distance
(about 50 mph).
Rain, Fog, Or Snow
In a very heavy rain, snowstorm, or thick fog, you may not be able to see much
more than 200 feet ahead When you cannot see any farther than that, you cannot
safely drive faster than 30 mph. In a very heavy downpour, you may not be able to
see well enough to drive. If this happens, pull off the road in a safe place and wait
until the rain clears
Hills And Curves
You may not know what is on the other side of a hill or just around a curve, even
if you have driven the road many times. If a vehicle is stalled on the road just over
a hill or around a curve, you must be able to stop Whenever you come to a hill or
curve where you cannot see over or around, adjust your speed so you can stop if
necessary

-- 124 of 151 --

125
SECTION F I V E
Parked Vehicles
Vehicles parked along the side of the road may block your view. People may be
ready to get out of a vehicle or walk out from between parked vehicles Give
parked vehicles as much room as you safely can
Sight Distance Rule
Drive at a speed where you can always safely stop To tell if you are driving too fast
for conditions, use the “Four-Second Sight Distance Rule.” Pick out a stationary
object as far ahead as you can clearly see (e.g., a sign or a telephone pole). Start
counting “one-one-thousand, two-one-thousand, three-one-thousand, four-one-
thousand.” If you reach the object before you finish saying “four-one-thousand,”
you need to slow down You are going too fast for your sight distance You must
not drive faster than the distance you can see. If you do, you are not safe and could
injure or kill yourself or others
You should also use the four-second sight distance rule at night to make sure you
are not over-driving your headlights
Speed Limits
You must comply with speed limits They are based on the design of the road
and the type of vehicles that use them. Speed limits take into account things you
cannot see, such as side roads and driveways where people may pull out suddenly
and the amount of traffic that uses the road.
Remember, speed limits are posted for ideal conditions. If the road is wet or icy,
if you cannot see well, or if traffic is heavy, then you must slow down. Keep in
mind even if you are driving under the posted speed limit, you can get a ticket for
traveling too fast during unsafe conditions
SHARING SPACE
You must always share the road with others The more distance you keep between
yourself and everyone else, the more time you have to react This space is like a
safety cushion The more you have, the safer you can be This section describes
how to make sure you have enough space around you when you drive
Space Ahead
Rear-end crashes are very common. They are caused from drivers following too
closely to be able to stop before hitting the vehicle ahead when it suddenly stops
There is an easy way to tell if you are following too closely. It is called the “three-

-- 125 of 151 --

126
second rule,” and it works at any speed.
• Watch for when the rear of the vehicle ahead passes a sign, pole, or
any other stationary point
• Count the seconds it takes you to reach the same spot. (“one-one-
thousand, two-one-thousand, three-one-thousand”).
• You are following too closely if you pass the mark before you finish
counting
• If so, drop back and then count again at another spot to check your
following distance. Repeat until you are following no closer than
three seconds
There are situations where you need more space in front of your vehicle. In the
following situations, you may need a four-second following distance to be safe
• On slippery roads – Because you need more distance to stop your
vehicle on slippery roads, you must leave more space in front of you
If the vehicle ahead suddenly stops, you will need the extra distance
to stop safely
• When the driver behind you wants to pass – Slow down to allow
room in front of your vehicle. Slowing will also allow the pass to be
completed sooner
• When following motorcycles – If the motorcycle should fall over, you
need extra distance to avoid hitting the rider The chances of a fall
are greatest on wet or icy roads, gravel roads, or on metal surfaces
such as bridges, gratings, or streetcar or railroad tracks
• When following drivers who cannot see you – The drivers of trucks,
buses, vans or vehicles pulling campers or trailers may not be able
to see you when you are directly behind them They could stop
suddenly without knowing you are there. Large vehicles also block
your view of the road ahead. Falling back allows you more room to
see ahead and to be seen
• When you have a heavy load or are pulling a trailer – The extra
weight increases your stopping distance
• When it is hard for you to see – When it is hard for you to see
ahead because of darkness or bad weather, you need to increase
your following distance
• When being followed closely – If you are being followed closely,
you should try and make extra space You will then be able to stop
without being hit from behind
• When following emergency vehicles – Police vehicles, ambulances,
and fire trucks need more room to operate.
• When approaching railroad crossings – Leave extra room for
vehicles required to come to a stop at railroad crossings, including
transit buses, school buses, or vehicles carrying hazardous materials
• When stopped on a hill or incline – Leave extra space when stopped
on a hill or incline The vehicle ahead may roll back when it starts up
or takes off

-- 126 of 151 --

127
SECTION F I V E
Space Behind
It is not always easy to maintain a safe distance behind your vehicle. However,
you can help keep the driver at a safe distance by keeping a steady speed and
signaling in advance when you have to slow down or turn
• Stopping to pick up or let off passengers – Try to find a safe place
out of traffic to stop.
• Parallel parking – If you want to parallel park and there is traffic
coming behind you, put on your turn signal, pull next to the space,
and allow following vehicles to pass before you park
• Driving slowly – When you have to drive so slowly that you slow
down other vehicles, pull to the side of the road when safe to do so
and let them pass. There are “turnout” areas on some two lane roads
you can use. Other two lane roads sometimes have “passing lanes.”
• Being tailgated – Every now and then you may find yourself being
followed closely or “tailgated” by another driver. If you are being
followed too closely and there is a right lane, move over to the right
If there is no right lane, wait until the road ahead is clear then reduce
speed slowly This will encourage the tailgater to drive around you
Never slow down quickly to discourage a tailgater, all that does is
increase your risk of being hit from behind
Space To The Side
You need space on both sides of your vehicle to have room to turn or change
lanes
• Avoid driving next to other vehicles on multi-lane roads. Someone
may crowd your lane or try to change lanes and pull into you Move
ahead or drop in back of the other vehicle
• Keep as much space as you can between yourself and oncoming
vehicles On a two-lane road, this means not crowding the center
line. In general, it is safest to drive in the center of your lane.
• Make room for vehicles entering on a roadway that has two or more
lanes. If there is no one next to you, move over a lane.
• Keep extra space between your vehicle and parked cars. Someone
could step out from a parked vehicle, from between vehicles, or a
parked vehicle could pull out
• Give extra space to pedestrians or bicycles, especially children They
can move into your path quickly and without warning. Do not share

-- 127 of 151 --

128
a lane with a pedestrian or bicyclist Wait until it is safe to pass in the
adjoining lane
• Split the difference between two hazards. For example, steer a
middle course between oncoming and parked vehicles. However,
except in the case of a vulnerable user such as a pedestrian or a
cyclist, if one hazard is more dangerous than the other, leave a little
more space on the dangerous side. For example, if the oncoming
vehicle is a tractor-trailer, leave a little more room on the side that
the truck will pass
• When possible, take potential hazards one at a time. For example, if
you are overtaking a bicycle and an oncoming vehicle is approaching,
slow down and let the vehicle pass first so that you can give extra
room to the bicycle. Motorists are required to leave a minimum of
three feet of clearance at all times when passing a cyclist, and on
multi-lane roads to move to the adjacent lane whenever possible
Space To Merge
Anytime you want to merge with other traffic, you need a gap of about four
seconds. If you move into the middle of a four-second gap, both you and the
vehicle that is now behind you have a three-second following distance You need a
four-second gap whenever you change lanes, enter a roadway, or when your lane
merges with another travel lane
• Do not try to merge into a gap that is too small. A small gap can
quickly become even smaller. Enter a gap that gives you a big
enough space cushion to be safe
• If you want to cross several lanes, take them one at a time. Like
going up or down stairs one step at a time, it is safest and easiest
to merge one lane at a time. It is very difficult to determine that all
the lanes are free and safe to cross. If you wait until all the lanes are
clear, you can tie up traffic and even cause a crash.
Space To Cross Or Enter
When you cross traffic, you need a large enough gap to get all the way across the
road. When you enter traffic, you need enough space to turn and get up to speed.
• When you cross traffic, you need room to get all the way across.
Stopping halfway across is only safe when there is a median divider
large enough for your vehicle Do not stop on a divider where part of
your vehicle is sticking out into traffic.

-- 128 of 151 --

129
SECTION F I V E
• If you are turning left, make sure there are no vehicles or pedestrians
blocking your path You do not want to be caught waiting for a path
to clear while stuck across a lane that has oncoming vehicles coming
towards you
• Even if you have the green light, do not start across the intersection
if there are vehicles blocking your way. If you are caught in the
intersection when the light changes to red, you will block other
traffic. You can get a ticket for blocking an intersection.
• Never assume another driver will share space with you or give you
space. For example, do not turn just because an approaching vehicle
has a turn signal on The driver may plan to turn after passing your
vehicle or may have forgotten to turn the signal off from a prior turn
This is particularly true of motorcycles as their signals often do not
cancel by themselves Wait until the other driver actually starts to
turn and then go if it is safe to do so
• When you cross railroad tracks, make sure you can cross without
having to stop on the tracks
Space To Pass
Whenever signs or road markings permit you to pass, you will have to judge
whether you have enough room to pass safely Do not count on having enough
time to pass several vehicles at once. Be safe. As a general rule only pass one
vehicle at a time
• Oncoming vehicles – At a speed of 55 mph, you need about 10
seconds to pass That means you need a 10-second gap in oncoming
traffic and sight distance to pass. You must judge whether you will
have enough space to pass safely
At 55 mph you will travel over 800 feet in 10 seconds, as will an
oncoming vehicle That means you need over 1600 feet or about
one-third of a mile to pass safely. It is hard to judge the speed of
oncoming vehicles at this distance They do not seem to be coming
as fast as they really are. A vehicle that is far away generally appears
to be standing still. In fact, if you can actually see that it is coming
closer, it may be too close for you to pass. If you are not sure, wait to
pass until you are sure that there is enough space
• Hills and curves – You have to be able to see at least one-third of a
mile or about 10 seconds ahead. Anytime your view is blocked by a
curve or a hill, you should assume that there is an oncoming vehicle
just out of sight Therefore, you should treat a curve or a hill as you
do an oncoming vehicle This means you should not start to pass if
you are within one-third of a mile of a hill or curve
• Intersections – It is dangerous to pass where a vehicle is likely to
enter or cross the road. Such places include intersections, railroad
crossings, and shopping center entrances While you are passing,
your view of people, vehicles, or trains can be blocked by the vehicle
you are passing. Also, drivers turning right into the approaching lane
will not expect to find you approaching in their lane. They may not
even look your way before turning
• Lane restrictions – Before you pass, look ahead for road conditions
and traffic that may cause other vehicles to move into your lane. You
might lose your space for passing because of:

-- 129 of 151 --

130
• People or bicyclists near the road
• A narrow bridge or other situation that causes reduced lane
width
• A patch of ice, pot hole, or something on the road.
• Space to return – Do not pass unless you have enough space to
return to the driving lane; do not count on other drivers to make
room for you
• Railroad grade crossing – Do not pass if there is a railroad grade
crossing ahead
Before you return to the driving lane, be sure to leave enough room between
yourself and the vehicle you have passed When you can see both headlights of
the vehicle you just passed in your rearview mirror, it is safe to return to the driving
lane
Space For Special Situations
There are certain drivers and other road users to which you should give extra
room. Some are listed below.
Those who cannot see you – Anyone who cannot see you may enter your path
without knowing you are there Those who could have trouble seeing you include:
• Drivers at intersections or driveways whose view is blocked by
buildings, trees, or other vehicles
• Drivers backing into the roadway, or backing into or pulling out of
parking spaces
• Drivers whose windows are covered with snow or ice, or are steamed
up
• Pedestrians with umbrellas in front of their faces or with their hats
pulled down
People who are distracted – Even when others can see you, allow extra room
or be extra cautious if you think they may be distracted People who may be
distracted include:
• Delivery persons
• Construction workers
• Children or drivers who are not paying attention
People who may be confused – People who are confused may cause an unsafe
situation People who may be confused include:
• Tourists or others who do not seem to know where they are going
• Drivers who slow down for what seems like no reason
• Drivers looking for street signs or house numbers
Drivers in trouble – If another driver makes a mistake, do not make it worse. For
example, drivers who pass you when they do not have enough room. Slow down
and let them return to the drive lane safely. If another driver needs to suddenly
change lanes, slow down and let them merge. These gestures will keep traffic
moving smoothly and safely and help you avoid a crash

-- 130 of 151 --

131
SECTION F I V E
BE IN SHAPE TO DRIVE
Driving safely is not always easy. In fact it is one of the most complex things that
people do. It is also one of the few things we do regularly that can injure or kill us.
It is worth the effort to be a careful driver.
Being a safe driver takes a lot of skill and judgment. This task is even more difficult
when you are just learning to drive Driving can easily take every ability you have
If anything happens so you are not up to your ability, you may not be a safe
driver Your ability to be a safe driver depends on being able to see clearly, not
being overly tired, not driving while on drugs or drinking alcohol, being generally
healthy, and being emotionally fit to drive. In other words, being in “shape” to
drive safely
Vision
Good vision is a must for safe driving You
drive based on what you see. If you cannot
see clearly, you will have trouble identifying
traffic and road conditions, spotting potential
trouble, or reacting in a timely manner
Vision is so important that Delaware requires
that you pass a vision screening before you
get a driver license To pass this screening
you must have at least 20/40 vision in at
least one eye, with or without corrective
lenses. Those with 20/50 vision are restricted
to daylight driving only
Other important aspects of vision are:
• Side vision - You need to see “out the
corner of your eye.” This lets you spot
vehicles and other potential trouble
on either side of you while you look
ahead Because you cannot focus on things to the side, you also
must use your side mirrors and glance to the side if necessary
• Judging distances and speeds - Even if you can see clearly, you still
may not be able to judge distances or speeds very well You are not
alone; many people have problems judging distances and speeds
It takes a lot of practice to be able to judge both. It is especially
important in knowing how far you are from other vehicles, judging
safe gaps when merging and when passing on two-lane roads, or
when judging the speed of a train before crossing railroad tracks
safely
• Night vision - Many people who can see clearly in the daytime
have trouble seeing at night. It is more difficult for everyone to
see at night than in the daytime. Some drivers have problems with
glare while driving at night, especially with the glare of oncoming
headlights. If you have problems seeing at night, don’t drive more
than is necessary and be very careful when you do
Seeing well is important to safe driving. You should have your eyes checked every
year or two by an eye specialist You may not realize you have poor vision until
your eyes are tested. If you need to wear glasses or contact lenses for driving,
remember to:

-- 131 of 151 --

132
• Always wear them when you drive, even if it is only to run down
to the corner. If your driver license says you must wear corrective
lenses and you do not and you happen to be stopped, you could get
a ticket
• Try to keep an extra pair of glasses in your vehicle. If your regular
glasses are broken or lost, you can use the spare pair to drive safely
This also can be helpful if you do not wear glasses all the time as it is
easy to misplace them
• Avoid using dark glasses or tinted contact lenses at night, even if
you think they help with glare They can cut down the light that you
need to see clearly
Hearing
Hearing can be helpful to safe driving. The sound of horns, a siren, or screeching
tires can warn you of danger. Hearing problems, like bad eyesight, can come on so
slowly that you do not notice it Drivers who know they are deaf or have hearing
problems can adjust and be safe drivers These drivers learn to rely more on their
vision and tend to stay more alert. Studies have shown that the driving records
of hearing-impaired drivers are just as good as those drivers with good hearing
Fatigue
You cannot drive as safely when you are tired as when you are rested You do not
see as well, nor are you as alert. It takes you more time to make decisions, and you
do not always make good decisions You can be more irritable and can get upset
more easily When you are tired, you could fall asleep behind the wheel and crash,
injuring or killing yourself or others
There are things you can do to help from getting tired on a long trip, such as:
• Try to get a normal night’s sleep before you leave
• Do not leave on a trip if you are already tired Plan your trips so you
can leave when you are rested
• Do not take any medicine that can make you drowsy
• Eat lightly. Do not eat a large meal before you leave. Some people
get sleepy after they eat a big meal
• Take breaks. Stop every hour or so or when you need to. Walk
around, get some fresh air, and have some coffee, soda, or juice The
few minutes spent on a rest break can save your life Plan for plenty
of time to complete your trip safely
• Try not to drive late at night when you are normally asleep Your
body thinks it is time to go to sleep and will try to do so
• Never drive if you are sleepy. It is better to stop and sleep for a few
hours than to take a chance you can stay awake. If possible, switch
driving tasks with another driver so you can sleep while they drive
Drinking And Driving
Nationally, alcohol is involved in about 28% of the traffic crashes in which someone
is killed. If you drink alcohol, even a little, your chances of being in a crash are
much greater than if you did not drink any alcohol
No one can drink alcohol and drive safely, even if you have been driving for many

-- 132 of 151 --

133
SECTION F I V E
years. New drivers are more affected by alcohol than experienced drivers, because
they are still learning to drive
Drinking alcohol and then driving is dangerous The penalties are very tough
People who drive after drinking risk heavy fines, higher insurance rates, loss of
license, and even jail sentences Penalties in Delaware are summarized in the
Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving paragraph in Section Two of this manual.
Health
Many health problems can affect your driving— a bad cold, infection, or virus Even
little problems like a stiff neck, a cough, or a sore leg can affect your driving. If you
are not feeling well and need to go somewhere, let someone else drive
Some conditions can be very dangerous:
• Epilepsy - So long as it is under medical control, epilepsy generally is
not dangerous. In Delaware those persons who are subject to loss of
consciousness due to disease of the central nervous system must be
certified that the infirmity is under sufficient control to permit them
to drive safely
• Diabetes - Diabetics who take insulin should not drive when there
is any chance of an insulin reaction, blackout, convulsion, or shock
Such a situation could result from skipping a meal or snack or from
taking the wrong amount of insulin. It also might be a good idea to
have someone else drive for you during times when your doctor is
adjusting your insulin dosage. If you have diabetes, you also should
have your eyes checked regularly for possible night blindness or
other vision problems
• Heart condition - People with heart diseases, high blood pressure,
or circulation problems or those in danger of a blackout, fainting,
or a heart attack should not get behind the wheel. If you are being
treated by a doctor for a heart condition, ask if the condition could
affect your ability to drive safely
Emotions
Emotions can have a great effect on your driving safely You may not be able to
drive well if you are overly worried, excited, afraid, angry, or depressed
• If you are angry or excited, give yourself time to cool off. If necessary
take a short walk, but stay off the road until you have calmed down
• If you are worried, feeling down, or are upset about something, try
to keep your mind on your driving. Some have found listening to the
radio helps
• If you are impatient, give yourself extra time for your driving trip.
Leave a few minutes early. If you have plenty of time, you may not
tend to speed or do other things that can cause you to get a traffic
ticket or cause a crash Don’t be impatient waiting for a train to cross
in front of you Driving around lowered gates or trying to beat the
train can be fatal

-- 133 of 151 --

134
VEHICLE EMERGENCIES
There is always a chance of a vehicle problem while driving You should follow the
recommended maintenance schedule listed in the your vehicle’s owner manual
Following these preventive measures greatly reduces the chance your vehicle will
have a problem Possible vehicle failures and what you can do if they happen are
listed below
Steering Wheel Locking Device
Never turn your vehicle’s ignition to the “lock” position while it is still in motion.
This will cause the steering to lock if you try to turn the steering wheel, and you
will lose control of your vehicle
Brake Failure
If your brakes stop working:
• Pump the brake pedal several times This will often build up enough
brake pressure to allow you to stop
• If that does not work, use the parking brake. Pull on the parking
brake handle slowly so you will not lock the rear wheels and cause a
skid Be ready to release the brake if the vehicle does start to skid
• If that does not work, start shifting to lower gears and look for a safe
place to slow to a stop Make sure the vehicle is off the roadway Do
not drive the vehicle without brakes
If your brakes are wet:
• After driving through deep water you should test your brakes. They
may pull to one side or not hold at all
• To dry brakes, put your car in low gear, drive slowly, and tap/apply
brakes lightly
• Test every 200 feet, continuing until braking action returns to
normal
Running Off The Pavement
Running off the pavement causes serious crashes. To avoid doing so, be attentive.
If you run off the pavement or are forced off:
• Don’t panic
• Don’t jam on the brakes Brake carefully or not at all
• Take your foot off the accelerator
• Grip the steering wheel tightly as the unusual stress may twist it from
your hands
• Don’t try to get back onto the pavement until you have your vehicle
under control, your speed is reduced to 15 mph or less, and you have
looked for traffic behind you. Then turn the front wheels sharply
toward the pavement Be careful not to cross the center line

-- 134 of 151 --

135
SECTION F I V E
Tire Blowout
If a tire suddenly goes flat:
• Hold the steering wheel tightly and keep the vehicle going straight.
• Slow down gradually. Take your foot off the gas pedal and use the
brakes lightly
• Do not stop on the road if at all possible Pull off the road in a safe
place
Power Failure
If the engine dies while you are driving:
• Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Be aware that the steering
wheel may be difficult to turn, but you can turn it.
• Pull off the roadway The brakes should still work, but you may have
to push very hard on the brake pedal
Headlight Failure
If your headlights suddenly go out:
• Try the headlight switch a few times
• If that does not work, put on the emergency flashers, turn signals, or
fog lights if you have them
• Pull off the road as soon as possible
Gas Pedal Sticks
The motor keeps going faster and faster:
• Keep your eyes on the road.
• Quickly shift to neutral.
• Pull off the road when safe to do so
• Turn off the engine

-- 135 of 151 --

136
Fire
• If smoke comes from under the hood, get off the roadway.
• If no chemical fire extinguisher is available, use dirt or sand to smother
the fire. Do not use water – burning gas will float on it and spread the fire.
• If a fire gets out of control, move at least 100 feet away from the
vehicle as the gas tank may explode
Stalling On Railroad Tracks
• Look both ways for trains. If none are coming, try to restart your
vehicle. If it does not start, or you are not sure whether a train is
coming, get out and move away from your vehicle
• If there is a train coming, get out and move away from the tracks.
Get as far away as you can, and run in the general direction the train
is coming from, so that debris from the collision will not hit you
AVOIDING COLLISIONS
When it looks like a collision may happen, many drivers panic and fail to act. In
some cases they do act, but they do something that does not help to reduce the
chance of the collision There is almost always something you can do to avoid the
crash or reduce the impact of the crash. In avoiding a collision, drivers have three
options: stop, turn, or speed up
Stopping Quickly
Many newer vehicles have an ABS (Anti-lock Braking System). Be sure to read the
vehicle’s owner manual on how to use the ABS. The ABS system will allow you to
stop without skidding. In general, if you need to stop quickly:
With ABS
• Press on the brake pedal as hard as you can and keep pressing on it
• You might feel the brake pedal pushing back when the ABS is
working. Do not let up on the brake pedal. The ABS system will only
work with the brake pedal pushed down
Without ABS
• You can cause the vehicle to go into a skid if you brake too hard
• Apply the brakes as hard as you can without locking them.
• If the brakes lock up, you will feel the vehicle start to skid. Quickly let
up on the brake pedal
• As soon as the vehicle stops skidding, push down on the brake pedal
again. Keep doing this until the vehicle has stopped.
Turning Quickly
In most cases, you can turn the vehicle quicker than you can stop it. You should
consider turning in order to avoid a collision
Make sure you have a good grip with both hands on the steering wheel Once you
have turned away or changed lanes, you must be ready to keep the vehicle under
control. Some drivers steer away from one collision only to end up in another.
Always steer in the direction you want the vehicle to go.

-- 136 of 151 --

137
With ABS - One aspect of having ABS is that you can turn your vehicle while braking
without skidding This is very helpful if you must turn and stop or slow down
Without ABS - If you do not have ABS, you must use a different procedure to
turn quickly. You should step on the brake pedal, then let up and turn the steering
wheel Braking will slow the vehicle, put more weight on the front tires, and allow
for a quicker turn. Do not lock up the front wheels while braking or turn so sharply
that the vehicle can only plow ahead
Remember that generally it is better to run off the road than to crash head-on into
another vehicle
Speeding Up
Sometimes it is best or necessary to speed up to avoid a collision. This may happen
when another vehicle is about to hit you from the side or from behind and there
is room to the front of you to get out of danger Be sure to slow down once the
danger has passed
Dealing With Skids
Any road that is safe under normal conditions can
be dangerous when it is wet or has snow or ice on it
High speeds under normal conditions also increase
the possibility of a skid if you must turn or stop
suddenly. Skids are caused when the tires can no
longer grip the road. As you cannot control a vehicle
when it is skidding, it is best not to cause your vehicle
to skid in the first place. Skids are caused by drivers
traveling too fast for conditions
If your vehicle begins to skid:
• Stay off the brake. Until the vehicle slows,
your brakes will not work and could cause you
to skid more
• Steer. Turn the steering wheel in the direction
you want the vehicle to go. As soon as the
vehicle begins to straighten out, turn the
steering wheel back the other way. If you do
not do so, your vehicle may swing around in
the other direction and you could start a new
skid
• Continue to steer Continue to correct your
steering, left and right, until the vehicle is
again moving down the road under your
control
PROTECT YOURSELF IN COLLISIONS
You may not always be able to avoid a collision Try everything you can to keep
from getting hit. If nothing works, try to lessen any injuries that could result from
the crash The most important thing you can do is to use your lap and shoulder
belts Besides your safety belts, there are a couple of other things that could help
prevent more serious injuries

-- 137 of 151 --

138
Hit From The Rear
If your vehicle is hit from the rear, your body will effectively be thrown backwards. Press
yourself against the back of your seat, and put your head against the head restraint Be
ready to apply your brakes so that you will not be pushed into another vehicle
Hit From The Side
If your vehicle is hit from the side, your body will effectively be thrown towards
the side that is hit. Air bags may not help in this situation. Your lap and shoulder
belts are needed to help keep you behind the wheel Get ready to steer or brake
to prevent your vehicle from hitting something else
Hit From The Front
If your vehicle is about to be hit from the front, it is important to try to have a
“glancing blow” rather than being struck head on. This means that if a collision
is going to happen, you should try to turn the vehicle. At worst, you will hit with
a glancing blow; or you might miss it. If your vehicle has an air bag, it will inflate.
It also will deflate following the crash, so be ready to prevent your vehicle from
hitting something else You must use your lap and shoulder belts to keep you
behind the wheel and to protect you if your vehicle has a second crash
CRASHES
Do not stop at a crash unless you are involved or if emergency help has not yet
arrived. Keep your attention on your driving and keep moving, watching for people
who might be in or near the road. Never drive to the scene of a crash, fire, or other
disaster just to look. You may block the way for police, firefighters, ambulances,
tow trucks, and other rescue vehicles
No matter how good a driver you are, there may be a time when you are involved
in a crash. If you are involved in a crash, you must stop. If you are involved in a
crash with a parked vehicle, you must try to locate the owner. If any person is
injured or killed, the police must be notified. It is a crime for you to leave a crash
site where your vehicle was involved if there is an injury or death before police
have talked to you and gotten all the information they need about the crash
You may want to carry a basic vehicle emergency kit These kits have emergency
flares, first aid supplies, and basic tools.
At The Crash Scene
• Stop your vehicle at the crash site. If, after reasonably ascertaining
that there are no injuries or deaths, and if the damaged vehicle
is obstructing traffic, the driver of the vehicle must make every
reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not to
obstruct the regular flow of traffic more than necessary.
• Do not stand or walk in traffic lanes. You could be struck by
another vehicle
• Turn off the ignition of wrecked vehicles Do not smoke around
wrecked vehicles. Fuel could have spilled and fire is a real danger.
• If there are power lines down with wires in the road, do not go near
them
• Make sure that other traffic will not be involved in the crash. Use
flares or other warning devices to alert traffic of the crash.

-- 138 of 151 --

139
If Someone Is Injured
• Get help Make sure the police and emergency medical or rescue
squad have been called. If there is a fire, inform the police when they
are called
• Do not move the injured unless they are in a burning vehicle or in
other immediate danger of being hit by another vehicle Moving a
person can make their injuries worse
• First help anyone who is not already walking and talking. Check for
breathing then check for bleeding
• If there is bleeding, apply pressure directly on the wound with your
hand or with a cloth Even severe bleeding can almost always be
stopped or slowed by putting pressure on the wound
• Do not give injured persons anything to drink, not even water
• To help prevent an injured person from going into shock, cover them
with a blanket or coat to keep them warm
Reporting Crashes
The driver of any vehicle involved in a crash resulting in apparent damage to
property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the crash. If the
damage resulting from such a crash is to the property of the driver only, with no
damage to the person or property of another, the driver need not stay at the scene
of the crash but shall immediately report the crash
The driver of any vehicle involved in a crash resulting in injury or death to any
person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the crash The driver
shall render aid to any person injured, including the carrying of the injured person
to a hospital or physician for medical treatment as needed
Exchange information with other drivers involved in the crash. If there is personal
property damage, injury, or death, the driver shall provide their name, address,
vehicle registration number, driver license number, and insurance company and
the policy number
Get the names and addresses of all people involved in the crash and any witnesses,
including the injured persons
Should the crash involve a parked vehicle, try to find the owner. If you cannot,
leave a note in a place where it can be seen with information on how the owner
can reach you and the date and time of the crash
The driver of any vehicle involved in a crash shall immediately report such crash to
the police agency which has primary jurisdictional responsibility for the location in
which the crash occurred:
1 When the crash results in injury or death to any person
2 When the crash occurs on a public highway, and it results in property
damage to an apparent extent of $500 00 or more
3 When it appears that a crash involves a driver whose physical ability
has been impaired as a result of alcohol or drug use, and it results in
property damage to an apparent extent of $1,000 00 or more
Crash forms are available from most insurance agents The form on the following
pages may be useful when reporting a crash

-- 139 of 151 --

140
Report an Issue
If you have observed a roadway condition that should be addressed immediately,
such as a traffic signal malfunction, sign damage, debris in the roadway, or an
improperly set up work zone, please directly contact the DelDOT Transportation
Management Center (operating 24/7/365) at 302-659-4600, #77 on your cell, or
through e-mail at deldottmc@state.de.us
The Report an Issue form is also available online accessible from the following link
https://deldot.gov/Traffic/ReportRoadCondition/index.shtml
NOTES

-- 140 of 151 --

141
NOTES

-- 141 of 151 --

142
NOTES

-- 142 of 151 --

143
CRASH REPORTING FORM
Crash Date 	Time
Street/Hwy./Intersection 	City 	State
Police Dept./Sheriff 	Case # 	Tickets Issued? Yes/No
If yes, to whom? 	Charge
OTHER VEHICLE
Year 	Make 	Model
Color 	License Plate # 	State
DRIVER OF OTHER VEHICLE
Name 	Age 	Apparent Injuries? Yes/No
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
Drivers License #/State 	Insurance Carrier
REGISTERED OWNER OF OTHER VEHICLE
Name
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
Drivers License #/State 	Insurance Carrier
PASSENGERS IN OTHER VEHICLE
Name
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
Age Sex Ht. Wt. 	Position in vehicle at time of crash
Injury Type

-- 143 of 151 --

144
PASSENGERS IN OTHER VEHICLE
Name
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
Age Sex Ht. Wt. 	Position in vehicle at time of crash
Injury Type
WITNESSES
Name
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
Name
Street 	City 	State 	Zip
Home Phone 	Business Phone 	Ext.
DESCRIPTION
DRAWINGS

-- 144 of 151 --

145
INDEX
Adjusting to Road Conditions 	121-122
Aggressive Driving 	48
Alcohol, Drugs and Driving 	49-58
Animal Drivers and Riders 	100
Basic Driving 	110-117
Backing 	103
Beacons Supplementing Signs 	76
Bicycles 	94-97
Bike Box 	11, 94
Blood Alcohol 	49-51
Braking 	113
Cell Phone/Hand-Held Electronic Device Use While Driving 	79
CDL 	36
Change of Name or Address 	32, 66
Child Safety Devices, Belts 	106-109
Child Support Delinquency 	45
Class D License 	36-38
Classification of Licenses 	36-38
Conditional License 	38, 88
Construction Equipment & Devices 	76-78
Crashes 	138-139
Crossing, Pedestrian 	92-93
Defensive Driving Courses 	48
Diverging Diamond Intersection (DDI) 	84
Documents Required for Driver License or ID 	20-26
Drinking and Driving 	48-51
Driver’s Education 	26
Driver’s Examination 	39-42
Driver License 	17-31
First Time Applicants 	27-29
Change of Name or Address 	32
Classes of 	36-38
Replacement Driver License 	32
Federal Identification Standards 	16-17
Fees 	14-15
Graduated Driver License 	37
Improvement Programs 	45-47
Learner’s Permit 	27-29
Licensed in Other States 	30
Medical Conditions 	42-43
Permanent Renewal 	31
Restricted 	31

-- 145 of 151 --

146
Renewals 	31
Revocation & Suspension 	43-45
Who Does Not Need 	17
Who May Not Be Licensed 	17
Driving in Fog, Rain, or Snow 	124
Driving Violations 	43-45
Driving While Intoxicated 	48-58
Driving While Suspended or Revoked 	48
Drugs 	51
Emergencies 	134-136
Emergency Notification System (ENS) 	81
Emergency Vehicles 	80
Emotions 	133
Endorsements 	38-39
Equipment (Vehicle)
Required 	59
Additional 	60
Prohibited 	60-61
Examination, Driver 	39-42
Exchange Student Licensing 	31
Eye Screening (Test) 	39
Farm Equipment 	100
Fire 	136
Fees 	14-15
Flaggers 	78
Financial Responsibility 	62-63
Fog, Darkness 	124
Following, Sight of Distance (4 second rule) 	125
Good Samaritan Law 	35
Habitual Offender 	44
Hardship License 	38
Headlights, use of 	61, 116
High Occupancy Vehicles (HOV) 	83
Identification Cards 	32
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) 	55-58
Immigration Status 	18-20
Implied Consent 	53
Inspection and Registration 	63-66
Out of State 	66
Renewal 	65-66
Insurance, Liability 	62-63
Lane Control 	82-86
Lane Driving 	82-86

-- 146 of 151 --

147
Learner’s Permits 	27-29, 37
Lift Kits 	61
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Program for First Offense Election (FOE) 	55
Ignition Interlock Device (IID) Program 	57
Medical Conditions 	42
Medical Indicator 	14, 34
Medical Suspensions 	43
Megan’s Law 	34
Mopeds 	99
Motorcycles 	38, 97-99
Move Over Laws 	80
New Residents 	59, 62
Next of Kin Registry 	34
Night Driving 	123
Occupational Licenses 	38, 47
OHV (Off Highway Vehicles) 	99
On-Line Services 	13
Organ and Tissue Donor 	34-35
Out-of-State Inspections 	66
Overhead Lane Signals 	73
Overtaking (Passing) 	79
Parking 	89-91
Pavement Markings 	82-83
Pedestrians 	92-93
Point System 	46
Railroads 	81-82, 136
Rectangular Rapid Flashing Beacon 	71
Red Light Reinforcement Program 	67
Registration 	59-63
Change of Address 	32, 66
Change of Name 	32, 66
License Plates 	61, 63
Renewals 	65
Report an Issue 	140
Required Documentation Table 	21-26
Revocation of Driver License 	43-45
Right of Way 	67, 86
Road Machinery 	99
Road Test 	40-41
Rules of the Road 	67-102
Safety Belts 	106-109
School Buses 	39, 87-88
Selective Service Registration 	34

-- 147 of 151 --

148
Sharing the Road with Trucks 	100-102
Signaling 	79, 116-120
Signals, Signs 	67-78
Signals, Hand 	120
Skidding 	137
Slow-Moving Vehicles 	100
Space Sharing 	125-130
Social Security Numbers 	22, 34
Speeding Violations 	47
Speed Limits 	91
Steering Wheel Locking 	134
Stopping and Parking 	90-91
Studded Tires 	61
Suspension of Driver License 	43-45
Tailgating 	127
TAT- Human Trafficking 	35
Taxi/Limo Endorsement 	39
Temporary Licenses 	37-38
Testing 	39-42
Tinted Windows 	61
Title 	64-65
Traffic Control Laws 	81-88
Transfer Driver License 	29-30
Trip Planning 	103
Tripeds (and Mopeds) 	99
Turning 	85-86
Two-Way Cycle Track 	13, 95
Vehicle Registration 	62-63
Vision Screening 	39
Voter Registration 	33
Wet Pavement 	121-122
Who Must Not Use the Highway 	99-100
Work Zones 	76-77
Zero Tolerance Law 	53
DMV WEB PAGE 	dmv.de.gov
TEEN DRIVER WEB PAGE 	teendriving.dmv.de.gov
SENIOR DRIVER WEB PAGE 	seniordriver.dmv.de.gov

-- 148 of 151 --

JULY 2021

-- 149 of 151 --

JULY 2021	JULY 2025

-- 150 of 151 --

JULY 2025

-- 151 of 151 --