Revised August 2025
Driver Guide	Driver Guide
A guide to understanding
Missouri Motor Vehicle Laws
and Licensing Requirements
Missouri

-- 1 of 102 --


-- 2 of 102 --

Chapter 1 — The Missouri Driver License 	Page 3
Chapter 2 — The Driver Examination 	Page 18
Chapter 3 — Rules of the Road 	Page 22
Chapter 4 — Sharing the Road 	Page 28
Chapter 5 — Parking 	Page 35
Chapter 6 — Highway Driving 	Page 37
Chapter 7 — Pavement Markings, Traffic Signs, and
Signals 	Page 42
Chapter 8 — Safe Driving Tips For Everyday Driving 	Page 55
Chapter 9 — 	Safe Driving Tips For Special
Driving Conditions 	Page 62
Chapter 10 — Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving 	Page 67
Chapter 11 — The Point System 	Page 73
Chapter 12 — Vehicle Titling and Registration 	Page 75
Chapter 13 — Mandatory Insurance 	Page 79
Chapter 14 — Safety and Emissions Inspections
& Required Equipment 	Page 83
Chapter 15 — Commercial Vehicles 	Page 87
Chapter 16 — Districted Driving and
Electronic Communication Devices 	Page 92
Index 	Page 94
Contact Information 	Page 98
Note: The state motor vehicle laws described in this manual are not
reproduced in their entirety and the wording is not identical. Due to possible
federal and state law changes and Department of Revenue (Department)
policy, the information in this manual may not always be current. The
Department will make every effort to incorporate any changes as soon as
possible. Please visit our website for the most current version.
The Missouri Driver Guide is published by the Missouri Department of Revenue.
1
Table of Contents

-- 3 of 102 --

Carefully studying the Missouri Driver Guide will increase your driving
confidence and broaden your knowledge of Missouri traffic laws The
more knowledge you have, the safer you are!
To test your knowledge of traffic laws, you will need to take a written test
of 25 multiple-choice questions. Studying this guide will prepare you for that
test. You must correctly answer 20 questions to pass the test. All of the test
questions come directly from information found in this guide. There are no
“trick” questions.
To test your ability to drive a vehicle, you must take a driving skills test.
Your examiner realizes a driving test will probably be an unusual experience
for you, and you might even become nervous or uneasy. If you do become
nervous or fearful, please remember your examiner has accompanied many
other people exactly like you, and the examiner rides with you only to make
sure you can control your vehicle and observe the rules of safety. Your
examiner will not try to trick you in any way. Remember that thousands of
people pass this test every year and become licensed drivers. If they can do
it, so can you! Just relax and do the best you can.
We would like to hear your comments and questions about the material
included in this manual:
Address: 	Driver License Bureau
P.O. Box 200
Jefferson City, MO 65105-0200
Telephone: 	(573) 526-2407
Fax: 	(573) 522-8174
E-Mail: 	dlbmail@dor mo gov
Website: 	http://dor mo gov/
The names and telephone numbers of other related agencies and offices
are located on the last page of this guide.
The Missouri Commercial Driver License Manual and Motorcycle Operator
Manual are posted on our website at http://dor mo gov/. You may also
request a copy from the Missouri State Highway Patrol (MSHP), or any
Motor Vehicle and Driver Licensing Office (license office).
2

-- 4 of 102 --

Anyone who operates a motor vehicle or motor-driven cycle on public
roadways in Missouri is required to have a valid driver license. You may
obtain a Missouri driver license at any Missouri license office.
You must have a Missouri driver license if:
• You live in Missouri, are 16 years of age or older, and plan to drive.
• You are a new resident of Missouri and want to drive, even if you have a
driver license from another state.
• You are an out-of-state commercial driver who has moved to Missouri
within the last 30 days. (Please refer to the Missouri Commercial Driver
License Manual.)
You do not need a Missouri driver license if:
• You are a member of the armed forces and you have a valid driver
license from your home state.
• You are a full-time student and you have a valid driver license from your
home state.
• You operate or temporarily operate or move any farm tractor or
implement on a highway for agri-related purposes.
You are required to carry your driver license or permit when you drive. If any
law enforcement officer asks to see your driver license or permit, you must
present it. It is against the law for you to allow anyone else to use your
license or permit.
Tip! Anyone obtaining a new license or permit is required to show
verification of lawful status, identity (full legal name), social security number,
and Missouri residency. These requirements are explained in detail later in
this chapter.
Types of Permits
If you are under 21 years of age, you will be issued a permit identifying you
as a minor.
Instruction Permit — Eligible Age: 15
This is the first step in Missouri’s Graduated Driver License Program for
young drivers. Generally, this permit allows a young person to learn to drive
with the supervision of a licensed adult. See later in this chapter for detailed
information.
IMPORTANT NOTE: The driver examination record issued by the Missouri
State Highway Patrol is not valid as a permit or license. The test results will
be electronically submitted to the Department of Revenue.Take your copy
of the driver examination record and other required verification documents
to your local license office to apply for the actual permit or license to meet
GDL and legal operator requirements. The six-month permit period required
for intermediate license does not start until the issuance of the temporary
instruction permit.
Motorcycle Instruction Permit — Eligible Age: 15½ or 16
You may apply for a motorcycle instruction permit to learn to operate a
motorcycle or motortricycle. The age you are eligible to apply may be 15½
or 16 years, as described below.
3
Chapter 1 - The Missouri Driver License

-- 5 of 102 --

• 15½ years of age (15 years and 182 days)
The Motorcycle Instruction Permit will only be issued if you have
successfully completed an approved motorcycle rider training course.
You must pass the Class F and Class M written, vision, and road sign
tests. You must also have the written consent of your parent or legal
guardian. This permit allows daylight driving only, within a 50-mile radius
of home, a motorcycle of no larger than 250 cc, and no passengers.
• 	16 years of age or older
If you are 16 years old or older you may apply for a motorcycle instruction
permit, but the motorcycle rider training course is not required. If you do
not have a valid driver license, you must take the Class F and Class M
written tests to receive a motorcycle instruction permit.
When you are ready, you may take the motorcycle driving test and pay the
appropriate fee to become motorcycle qualified.
For more information about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle
Operator Manual posted on our website at dor mo gov/. You may also
request a copy from MSHP or any license office.
Types of Licenses
If you are under 21 years of age, you will be issued a license identifying you
as a minor. When you reach age 21, you may apply and pay for another
driver license (without the minor indication) or wait until your under-21
license expires.
Intermediate License (Class F) — Eligible Age: 16
This is the second step in Missouri’s Graduated Driver License (GDL) program
for young drivers. Generally, this license allows a young person certain
restricted driving privileges. See later in this chapter for detailed information.
Full Driver License (Class F) — Eligible Age: 18
This is the basic driver license, also called an operator license. You must
have a Class F license to operate any motor vehicle (other than one requiring
you to have a Class A, B, C, or E license.) The Class F license does not
allow you to drive a motorcycle unless the license shows the Motorcycle
(M) endorsement. Endorsements will be discussed later in this chapter. You
must pass the Class F written, vision, road sign, and driving tests.
For-Hire License (Class E) — Eligible Age: 18
When you test for a Class E license, the written exam will include questions
based on the complete driver guide, but mainly Chapter 15 (Commercial
Vehicles). You must also pass the vision and road sign tests. If you already
have a Class F license, a driving test is not required. However, you must still
meet the “under 21 requirements” (see page 18) for a full license if you apply
for a Class E license at age 18. There are a number of reasons you may
wish to obtain a Class E license, such as:
• If you receive pay for driving a motor vehicle transporting 14 or fewer
passengers (such as a driver for a day care center).
• If you will transport property for pay or as part of your job (such as a florist
delivery driver).
• If you regularly operate a motor vehicle for your employment which belongs
to another person and is designed to carry freight and merchandise. The
vehicle must be 26,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
and not required to be placarded for hazardous materials.
4

-- 6 of 102 --

The following individuals shall not be required to obtain a for-hire (Class E)
license pursuant to 387 438 RSMo:
• Individuals who use a motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight less than or
equal to 12,000 pounds for the purpose of providing transportation services as
an eligible Transportation Network Company driver or taxicab driver; or
• Individuals providing prepared food delivery services for entities such as
a fast food restaurant, delicatessen, or other facility engaged in the selling
of food for consumption off the premises of the facility.
Motorcycle License (Class M) — Eligible Age: 16
You must have a Class M license or permit (or a driver license with the
M endorsement) if you operate a motorcycle or motortricycle on public
roadways. You will need to pass the Class F and Class M written, vision,
road sign, and motorcycle skills tests. GDL requirements will apply to
Class M license applicants between the ages of 16 and 18. See the GDL
requirements later in this chapter. A driver operating a motorized bicycle is
not required to obtain a motorcycle endorsement, however he or she must
hold, a valid operator’s (or higher classification) license.
For more information about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle
Operator Manual posted on our website at dor mo gov/. You may also
request a copy from MSHP or any license office.
Commercial Driver License (Class A, B, or C)
You must have a commercial driver license based on the type of commercial
motor vehicle you drive. You must be at least 18 years old to apply for a
CDL, and at least 21 years old to obtain a CDL with a Hazardous Materials
or School Bus endorsement. You must still meet the “under 21” requirements
if you apply for a CDL at age 18.
For more information about Missouri’s commercial driving laws, see the
Commercial Driver License Manual posted on our website at dor mo gov/.
You may also request a copy from MSHP or any license office.
Nondriver Identification Card (Class ND)
You may obtain a photo nondriver ID for identification purposes. Your
nondriver ID expires on your date of birth in the sixth year after you apply.
If you are age 70 or older, your nondriver ID will be issued as non-expiring.
Exception: Nondriver ID applicants age 70 or older may be issued a six year
expiration date if applying for a REAL ID-compliant card or a lesser period
based on immigration document status review.
Requirements to Obtain a License or Permit
Depending on your age, whether you are obtaining a new license or permit,
if you are renewing one, or if you have just moved to Missouri, the
requirements to obtain a license are slightly different.
• If you are a driver age 15 to 21, the GDL program applies to you. Please
see the GDL section in this chapter for more information. You will need
to show verification of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name
and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, and
Missouri residency (detailed in this chapter) to qualify.
• If you are a Missouri driver, you may be required to provide verification
of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth),
social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri residency
will be required each time you apply to renew a driver license, nondriver
ID, or instruction permit. You must also present your previous license.
5

-- 7 of 102 --

6
• If you are obtaining a new Missouri license, you must show verification of
lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth), social
security number, a name change if applicable, and Missouri residency.
You will be required to take the four-part driver examination. The four-part
exam consists of a written test, vision test, road sign test, and a driving
skills test. (See Chapter 2 for more information.)
• If you are new to Missouri and are transferring your out-of-state driver
license, you will need to present verification of lawful status, identity (must
include full legal name and date of birth), social security number, name
change if applicable, Missouri residency, and mailing address, if different
than residential address. You must also surrender the license from your
previous state of residence, and take the vision and road sign tests. Upon
transfer of your out-of-state driver license, any driver license, permit or
nondriver ID issued in another state will be invalidated.
• You must take the four-part driver examination (detailed in Chapter 2) if
any of the following apply to you:
○ You are applying for a new Missouri driver license.
○ Your Missouri driver license has been expired for more than six
months (184 days).
○ Your out-of-state license has been expired for more than 184 days.
○ Your license was revoked because you have too many points (see
Chapter 11) on your driving record or because of an Administrative
Alcohol Revocation (see Chapter 10).
○ The Director of Revenue asks you to take the exam, even if you have
a current driver license.
Required Documents
When you obtain or renew any license, permit, or nondriver ID, you will be
required to present proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal
name and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable,
Missouri residency, and mailing address, if different than residential address.
You will also be required to present and surrender your current license,
permit, or nondriver ID. Details of these requirements are listed below. For
more information, visit dor mo gov/.
• Lawful Status: A U.S. citizen may show a U.S. Birth Certificate (certified
with an embossed, stamped or raised seal and issued by a vital records
agency. Hospital birth certificates and birth registration cards are not
acceptable.), a valid, unexpired U.S. passport a U.S. Certificate of
Citizenship, Certificate of Naturalization, or a Certificate of Birth Abroad.
A “copy” of a U.S. Birth Certificate (issued by a vital records agency
accompanied by a U.S. Military Identification Card or Discharge Papers.
This proof of lawful status is not acceptable for issuance of a REAL
ID-compliant document. Non-U.S. citizens must present the appropriate
immigration documents indicating the applicant’s status. Examine the
full list of acceptable required documents to obtain a REAL ID-compliant
or non REAL ID-compliant card at
dor mo gov/drivers/idrequirements php.
Age 65 and Older Exemption — If you are renewing a non REAL ID-compliant
non-commercial permit or driver license or nondriver ID and are age 65 or older
you may be exempt from presenting documents for place of birth.
• Identity: Documents used for verify identity must contain your full
legal name and date of birth. Many lawful status documents also prove

-- 8 of 102 --

7
identity, other examples include: Employment Authorization Document,
REAL ID-Compliant or non-REAL ID License, or a Foreign Passport with
a U.S. Visa accompanied by an I-94.
• Missouri Residency: You have a variety of options to prove your current
address. Examples include any two current utility bills (including phone,
electric, gas, water, sewer, and cable), property tax receipt, voter ID card,
or any official letter issued within the last 90 days by another state, local
governmental or another federal agency agency on its letterhead. To obtain
a REAL ID-compliant document, you must provide two documents verifying
Missouri residency. To obtain a non REAL ID-compliant document, you
must provide one document verifying Missouri residency. If you have a
separate mailing address, you must provide a document to verify the
mailing address.
Note: A Post Office Box is not acceptable as a residential address. You
need to show proof of residential address and alternate mailing address
(if applicable.) Current addresses are important! Your license will be
mailed to the address provided
○ 	If you are under the age of 21, and cannot provide an acceptable
document from the list for verification of a Missouri residential address,
a parent or legal guardian may provide such a document on your behalf.
Refer to the complete list of acceptable documents at dor mo gov. For
purposes of an application for a REAL ID-compliant document, the use
of the document submitted by the parent of guardian, is only acceptable
as one of the two required residency verification documents.
 	Residential address is the location at which a person has been
physically present, and that the person regards as home. A
residential address is a person’s true, fixed, principal, and
permanent home, to which a person intends to return and remain,
even though currently residing elsewhere.
• Social Security Number
State law requires you to include your Social Security Number (SSN) on
your application to obtain a Missouri License or permit. The SSN may be
provided by presenting the Social Security Card, (must be original, signed
and not laminated) W-2 Wage and Tax Statement, 1099 Form, or a Paystub
with Name and Social Security Number. Current valid Missouri driver license,
nondriver ID or permit applicants who have previously verified their SSN,
may be eligible to provide their number verbally for verification purposes.
If you do not have a social security number:
○ You must present a letter from the Social Security Administration
(SSA) regarding the status of your social security number.
Applicants without a social security number may be ineligible
for a REAL ID-compliant document depending upon lawful status
verification documents.
NOTE: If you are a nonimmigrant foreign student, who is not
authorized to work in the United States, submission of a status
letter from the SSA is not required. (You or your dependents
immigration document MUST reflect an F or a J classification.)
○ License or permit applications without a social security number
may be reviewed by the central office for final approval prior to
printing and mailing.

-- 9 of 102 --

Permit Fees
Fees for and duration of a permit are based on the applicant’s age at the time of the
transaction. Commercial learner’s permit knowledge test fees are not included.
License Fees
Fees and duration of license are based on the applicant’s age at the time of the
transaction. Commercial Driver License (CDL) knowledge and skills test fees are
not included.
*Based on the applicant’s age or document verification status at the time of the transaction.
• Name Changes - If your current name is different than it appears on
your identity and lawful status document presented, or is not the same
on all your documents, present one of the documents below showing
your correct current name.
• Last Name Change - certified marriage license, certified divorce
decree, certified court order, certified court ordered adoption papers, or
amended birth certificate.
• First Name Change - Certified court order.
• Middle Name Change - Certified court order.
Tip! Make sure you have all the necessary documents with you before you go
to your license office. It will save you time and the time of your fellow customers!
New / Renewal License
Type 	Minimum Age 	Cost 	Valid For
Intermediate License 	16 	$14.00 	0–2 years
Full License 	$16.50 	0–3 years*
(Class F) 	18 	or 	or
$33.00 	0–6 years*
For-Hire License 	$24.00 	0–3 years*(Class E)
18 	or 	or
$48.00 	0–6 years*
0–2 years
Commercial 	$29.00 	0–3 years*
Driver License 	18 	or 	or
(Class A, B, or C) 	$58.00 	0–6 years*
0–2 years
Motorcycle 	$16.50 	0–3 years*
Only License 	16 	or 	or
(Class M) 	$33.00 	0–6 years
Nondriver ID Card 	any age 	$24.00 	0–6 years*
or Non-Expiring
Nondriver ID Card 	17½ 	$0.00 	0–6 years*
(Voting Purposes Only) 	or Non-Expiring
Age 75 or older with
school bus
endorsement
New: $14.00
Renewal: $9.00
Age 75 or older with
school bus
endorsement
New: $16.50
Renewal: $9.00
New / Renewal Permit
Type 	Minimum Age 	Cost 	Valid For
Student Permit 	15 	$1.00 	Length of Approved Course
Instruction Permit 	15 	$10.00 	0–12 months
Motorcycle Permit 	15½ or 16 	$12.75 or $10.00 	0–6 months (182 days)
Commercial 	1 year (360 days or less)
Learner’s Permit 	18 	$19.00 	nonrenewable
8

-- 10 of 102 --

9
Restrictions
If you have limited driving experience or a medical condition that impairs your
ability to drive safely, you may receive a restricted license permitting you to
drive only under specific conditions. If you have a restricted license, it will
have one or more of the restriction codes shown below. You may be required
to take a driving test in order to have a restriction removed from your license.
If you disobey the restriction(s), you can be charged with driving without a
license, and if convicted, points will be placed on your driving record. If you
receive too many points (see Chapter 11), your license may be suspended
or revoked.
Restriction Codes
A 	Corrective Lenses 	N 	No Class A or B Passenger Vehicle
B 	Outside Rearview Mirror 	O 	No Tractor-Trailer CMV
C 	Daylight Driving Only 	P 	No Passengers In CMV Bus
D 	Auto Trans/Power Steering 	Q 	More Than Five Restrictions
E 	No Manual Transmission CMV 	R 	Special Seat Cushion
F 	Restricted to 45 MPH 	T 	Right Outside Mirror
G 	25 Mile Radius 	U 	Uncoded Restriction*
H 	Special Hand Devices 	V 	Medical Variance
I 	Intermediate License 	W Farm Waiver
J 	Electrical Turn Signals 	X 	No Cargo in CMV Tank Vehicle
K 	Intrastate Driving Only (CDL) 	Y 	Left Outside Mirror
L 	Non-Airbrake CMV 	Z 	No Full Air Brake Equipped CMV
M No Class A Passenger Vehicle
*An uncoded restriction is any restriction not listed here. An uncoded
restriction will be listed as a “U” in the restriction area of the driver license
or permit and the description will display on the back of the document,
space permitting. Any law enforcement officer, judge, or physician can ask
the Department to place restrictions on your license.
Medical Referral
There are two reasons you may be required to submit a physician’s
statement to the Department of Revenue:
• 	You have had epileptic seizures, convulsions, or blackouts within the
six months prior to your application for a license.
• 	A driver examiner, license clerk, family member, law enforcement
officer, physician, physical therapist, occupational therapist,
chiropractor, registered nurse, psychologist, social worker, professional
counselor, optometrist, or emergency medical technician, believes you
may have some other medical condition that would make you an
unsafe driver. This person must complete a Driver Condition Report
(Form 4319) and submit it to the Department.
Endorsements
Endorsements are just the opposite of restrictions because they qualify you
to do things you couldn’t do without the endorsement, such as: drive a
school bus or operate a motorcycle. The endorsements available for your
non-commercial (class F, E, or M) Missouri driver license are listed on the
following page.

-- 11 of 102 --

10
• 	School Bus (S) endorsement — A school bus endorsement is required
for anyone transporting students from school to home, home to school,
and to and from school-sponsored events in any vehicle designed for
carrying more than ten passengers. A school bus endorsement may
be issued to drivers age 21 or older who hold a Class E (For-Hire) license
or a commercial license with a Passenger (P) endorsement. A school bus
endorsement can be suspended for one year if a person fails to pass any
drug, alcohol, or chemical test administered in accordance with any federal
or state law, rule, or regulation regarding the operation of a school bus.
Missouri law has special operating regulations for school buses. For
drivers aged 75 or older holding a school bus endorsement mandatory
school bus skills testing must be completed biennially to retain the
endorsement. If you need more information related to general school
transportation requirements, contact: Missouri Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education, Division of Administrative and Financial
Services — School Transportation, e-mail: webreply@dmpt desemo gov;
phone: (573) 751-0357; fax: (573) 526-6898.
• 	Motorcycle (M) endorsement — A motorcycle endorsement on an operator
or higher class license is required if you operate a motorcycle or motortricycle
on public roadways. To add the motorcycle endorsement to an existing
license you will need to pass the motorcycle written test, vision, road sign,
and a skills test on a motorcycle or motortricycle. For more information
about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle Operator Manual
posted on our website at dor mo gov/. You may also request a copy from
MSHP or any license office.
• 	Additional endorsements are available if you have a Commercial Driver
License or Commercial Learner’s Permit. For more information about
Missouri’s commercial driving laws, see the Commercial Driver License
Manual posted on our website at dor mo gov/. You may also request a
copy from MSHP or any license office.
Renewing a License or Permit - Renewal Reminders
The Department will mail you a reminder to renew before your license expires.
A renewal notice will not be mailed for a temporary instruction permit or
commercial learner’s permit. The reminder will be sent to the mailing address
on your driver record. When you move, you may update your address in one
of the following ways:
• 	Complete an address change at your local license office; or
• 	Online at dor mo gov/.
Your reminder may state the fee required to renew your license. You
can renew your license up to six months before it expires. Each time you
renew, you will be required to take the vision and road sign test.
It is your responsibility to renew your driver license, even if you do not
receive your reminder. Failure to renew promptly may cause you to have to
retake the written and driving tests. You can be ticketed for driving without
a valid license. Exception: If you will be leaving the state or country for an
extended time you may request an early renewal of your driver license at
your local license office.

-- 12 of 102 --

11
A driver license may be valid for up to six years. If you allow it to expire, you
must not drive. If you would like to continue driving uninterrupted, you must
renew your license before it expires. If you do not renew your license within
six months (or 184 days) after its expiration date, you will have to take the
written and driving tests (see Chapter 2), in addition to the vision and road
sign tests.
License offices are usually busiest at the end of each month. Since you
may renew your license up to six months (184 days) before it expires, you
are encouraged to select a time to avoid the longer lines. If the renewal
dates for your driver license and motor vehicle registration renewal are
within six months, you may be able to complete both renewals at the same
time and save yourself a trip later to the license office.
Renewal by Mail for Active Duty Members of the Armed Forces
Missouri allows renewal by mail for members of the armed forces and their
dependents. Applicants should submit a completed Mail-In Driver License
Application (Form 4317) (available online at dor mo gov/ or faxed upon
request), along with required documents and fees.
Missouri allows a renewal without re-examination for members of the armed
forces whose license has expired while out of state, for up to six months
from honorable discharge or within 90 days of reestablishing residency
in Missouri, whichever occurs first. The expired Missouri license and
discharge papers must be submitted at the time of application in addition to
other applicable renewal documents. The expired license is not valid for
driving. These provisions only waive re-examination and do not extend the
actual driving privileges beyond the expiration date.
Lost, Stolen, or Destroyed License
If your license is lost or stolen while you are out of state, you may request a
Mail-In Driver License Application (Form 4317) by phone at (573) 751-4600
or download the form on our website.
If your license is lost, stolen, or destroyed, you must apply for a duplicate
license. If your current license expires within the next six months, you may
renew your license early rather than obtain a duplicate license. This saves
you time and money.
Renewing When Your License is Suspended or Revoked
If you held a non-commercial driver license, you may take the vision and
road sign tests and renew your license even while your driving privilege is
suspended. However, if your driving privilege has been revoked, you may
only renew your license during the revocation if it resulted from your refusal
to take a chemical test.
You will not receive your license back until you have completed your
reinstatement requirements and your driving privilege has been reinstated.
Other Information About Your Driver License
• 	Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Information
When you apply for a new, renewal, or duplicate instruction permit,
driver license or nondriver ID you will be asked two very important
questions at the time you make your application.

-- 13 of 102 --

12
1. 	“Do you consent to be listed in the Donor Registry System as an
organ, eye and tissue donor?”
If you say “yes”, your name will automatically be added to the Missouri
Organ and Tissue Donor Registry, managed by the Missouri Department
of Health and Senior Services or their agent. The registry is on a secure,
confidential database. The registry is a first-person consent registry
making your decision to to be added to the registry by answering “yes”,
or to be removed from the registry, by answering “no”, final unless
further action is taken by you. Joining the registry means you have
legally documented your decision to save lives by becoming an organ
and tissue donor at the time of your death. No further consent is needed,
which relieves your family of making that decision on your behalf.
2. 	“Do you authorize an Organ Donor symbol to be placed on your license
or permit?”
If you said yes to be listed in the Donor Registry system you will also be
asked if you would like an optional indicator placed on your document. If
you say “yes” to add the organ donor symbol, a red heart with a green
banner will appear on the front of your instruction permit, driver license, or
nondriver ID. There is no fee to place the symbol on your instruction
permit, driver license or nondriver ID, or place your name in the registry.
You may obtain more information regarding the donor registry or register
your decision and enroll online at donatelifemissouri org/.
• 	The back of your license or permit will include a box for placement
of an Organ Donor Sticker. If you did not elect to register with the
Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Registry, or you registered and did
not elect to have a symbol placed on the face of your document at
the time of issuance, you may complete registration or request an
Organ Donor Sticker online at donatelifemissouri org/
• 	When you apply for a driver license, permit or nondriver ID the clerk
must ask you if you would like to make a monetary donation to the
organ donor fund or the blindness awareness fund.
• 	“DHH” Notation for Deaf or Hard of Hearing Applicants
When you apply for or renew your driver license, nondriver ID, or
instruction permit, you may ask that a “DHH” notation be placed
on your driver license, nondriver ID, or instruction permit. In the
event of an emergency, this notation will allow law enforcement
or emergency and medical personnel to readily determine if you
are deaf or hard of hearing. This will assist in ensuring effective
communications with someone who is injured and nonresponsive.
In order to obtain the “DHH” notation, you must request the notation
when applying for a license or instruction permit.
• 	Boater Safety Indicator
If you are a resident of Missouri who has complied with the provisions
of Section 306 127, RSMo and possess a current Boating Safety
Education Card issued by the MSHP, you may request to obtain a
boater safety indicator on your driver license or nondriver ID. The
MSHP will accept the indicator on a valid driver license or nondriver
ID in lieu of carrying the separate Boating Safety Education Card.
You must request the new indicator and present your valid Boating
12

-- 14 of 102 --

13
Safety Education Card at the time of application for a new, renewal
or duplicate transaction. There will be an additional cost of $1 added to
standard processing fees when the boater identification indicator is initially
added to a driver license or nondriver ID document.
• 	Permanent Disability Indicator
If you are a resident of Missouri who is permanently disabled you may
request to have a permanent disability indicator placed on the back of
your driver license or nondriver ID at the time of application for a new,
renewal or duplicate transaction. To be eligible for the indicator you must
submit a Physicians Statement (Form 5294) - Permanent Disability
Indicator completed and signed by your physician, physical therapist,
occupational therapist licensed under Section 334, RSMo , or other
authorized healthcare practitioner. There will be no additional cost to add
the indicator. The standard new, renewal, or duplicate transaction and
processing fees will apply. You are not required by law to obtain a
permanent disability indicator on your driver license or non-driver license.
The indicator is not determination of eligibility or public benefits.
• 	Veteran Designation
If you are a veteran of the United States Armed Forces you may opt to
have a “VETERAN” designation placed on the front of your Missouri driver
license or nondriver ID, upon request, at the time of application for a new,
renewal or duplicate transaction. To be eligible for the designation, you
must submit one of the following acceptable discharge status verification
documents:
○ 	a United States Department of Defense discharge document,
otherwise known as a DD Form 214, that shows a discharge status of
“honorable”
or “general under honorable conditions” that establishes the person’s
service in the Armed Forces of the United States;
○ 	a United States Uniformed Services Identification Card, otherwise
known as a DD Form 2, that includes a discharge status of “retired” or
“reserve retired” establishing the person’s service in the Armed Forces
of the United States;
○ 	a United States Department of Veterans Affairs photo identification
card; or
○ 	a United States Military discharge document WD AGO 53, WD AGO
55, WD AGO 53-55, NAVPERS 553, NAVMC 78 PD, NAVCG 553,
D 256MC, DD 256MC, or DD 215 form that shows a discharge status
of “honorable” or “general under honorable conditions”.
There will be no additional cost to add the indicator. The standard new, renewal
or duplicate transaction and processing fees will apply. You are not required by
law to obtain the Veteran Designation.
Ever served on active duty in the United States Armed Forces?
If yes, visit dor mo gov/military/ to see the services and benefits DOR offers
to all eligible military individuals, or complete the survey at mvc dps mo gov/
MoVeteransInformation/Survey/DOR to receive information from the Mis-
souri Veterans Commission. A list of all state agency resourcesand benefits
can be found at veteranbenefits.mo.gov/state-benefits/.
• 	Medical Alert Notation
You may request to have a medical alert notation placed on the front of
your driver license or nondriver ID at the time of application for a new,

-- 15 of 102 --

14
renewal or duplicate transaction to indicate a medical alert for: Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD); Diabetes Mellitus (DM); Autism; Drug
Allergy; Epilepsy (EPIL); Alzheimer’s (ATD); Dementia (DEM);
Schizophrenia (SCHZ); High Blood Pressure (HBP); Speech Impaired; or
Cardiovascular Disease (CVD). You are not required by law to have a
medical alert notation on your driver license or nondriver ID. To be eligible
for the medical alert notation you must submit a Physicians statement –
Medical Alert Notation (Form 5839) that has been completed and signed
by a licensed physician, therapist, occupational therapist, or other
authorized license healthcare practitioner in the state of Missouri verifying
such diagnosis. There is no additional cost to add the medical alert
notation.
• 	Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA)
The Federal Driver’s Privacy Protection Act requires all states to close
the personal information contained on all motor vehicle, driver license and
nondriver ID records, unless otherwise directed by state law. Under
Missouri law, a person or entity may access the personal information if
exempt under the DPPA (and have submitted a Request for Security
Access Code (Form 4678) or have obtained express consent from the
record holder on a Request from Record Holder (Form 4681).
• 	Voter Registration
When you apply for or renew your driver license, nondriver ID, or
instruction permit, the clerk will ask you if you are registered to vote at
your current address. If your voter registration address has changed or if
you have changed your name since your prior voter registration application
(as shown on voter registration card) you may elect to submit updated
voter registration information by responding “Yes” to register to vote at the
time of license application. New or updated voter registration information
will be generated for your review and signature as part of your application.
Data from the application which is required for voter registration purposes
will then be submitted electronically through the Missouri Voter Registration
System to local election authorities.
• 	Selective Service Registration
Male applicants, age 18 to 26, may register with the Selective Service at
the time of their license or permit application.
Suspension or Revocation of Your License
There are a number of reasons your license may be revoked or suspended or
denied. Your best bet is to be responsible and be a good driver. You can lose
your license for any of the following reasons:
• 	Parent or Guardian Request to Deny a Driver License (Form 4811) — If
you are under the age 18, your parent or guardian may request that the
Director of Revenue deny you a license. If you already have a driver
license, the request will cancel your license. When the Department
receives the request, a denial will be placed on your driving record.
The denial expires when you turn 18 or when your parent or guardian
requests your driving status be cleared. Form 4811 may be found on the
Department’s website or at any license office.
• 	Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs (see Chapter 10).
• 	Refusing to let a police officer test you for alcohol or drugs.
• 	Leaving the scene of a traffic accident.
• 	Failing to file an accident report (see Chapter 13).
• 	Giving false information when you apply for a license.

-- 16 of 102 --

15
• 	Failing to settle a court judgment made against you for damages
resulting from a motor vehicle accident.
• 	Failing to keep insurance (financial responsibility) (see Chapter 13).
• 	Changing the information on your license or using someone else’s
license when you attempt to buy alcohol.
• 	Failing to appear for an exam when requested by the Driver License Bureau.
• 	Using a motor vehicle to commit a felony or causing the death of
someone in a motor vehicle crash.
• 	Having too many points on your driving record (see Chapter 11).
• 	Letting someone else use your driver license.
• 	Failing to appear in court or pay traffic tickets in Missouri or other states.
• 	Failing to pay child support.
• 	Failing to use an ignition interlock device when required.
• 	Stealing fuel from a gas station.
• 	Possessing any intoxicating liquor if you are a minor.
• 	Submitting false proof of insurance.
• 	Failing to yield the right-of-way and causing injury or death.
The Graduated Driver License (GDL) Law
Missouri’s Graduated Driver License Law requires all first-time drivers under
18 years old to obtain an instruction permit and complete a period of driving
with a licensed driver, followed by a period of restricted driving (intermediate
license), before getting a full license.
Studies from across the country show that deaths and serious injuries from
traffic crashes involving young drivers decline by as much as 58 percent
after a Graduated Driver License Law is implemented. Consider the
instruction permit as Step One, the intermediate license as Step Two, and
the full (Under 21) driver license as Step Three. The following are
descriptions of each step to help you understand the GDL program.
Step One: Instruction Permit Eligible Age: 15 See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-12 months, based on document verification status
To Obtain an Instruction Permit:
• 	Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests.
• 	A parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer (with a federal
residential job training program) must accompany you to the license
office to sign a permission statement.
Permit Notes:
• 	Under age 16, you may drive only when accompanied in the front seat
by a parent, stepparent, grandparent, legal guardian, qualified driving
instructor, or a person who is at least 25 years of age who has been
licensed for a minimum of three years and has received written
permission from the parent or legal guardian. If your parent, stepparent,
grandparent, or legal guardian is physically disabled, he or she may
designate up to two persons to accompany you in the vehicle to provide
behind-the-wheel instruction.
• 	At age 16 or older, you may drive when accompanied in the front seat
by a person who is at least 21 years old and has a valid driver license.
• 	Seat belts must be worn by the driver and all passengers.
• 	Your driver examination record alone is not legal for driving Be
sure to carry your permit with you
• 	You may renew your instruction permit as many times as needed
without taking additional written tests.

-- 17 of 102 --

• 	Free “PERMIT DRIVER” window signs are available at all license offices.
To Graduate to an Intermediate License:
You must have an instruction permit for a minimum of six months (182
days) beginning the day after issuance.
• 	You must have completed 40 hours of driving instruction with a parent,
stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer (with a federal residential
job training program). The required 40 hours must include at least ten
hours of nighttime driving.
Step Two: Intermediate License Eligible Age: 16 to 18
See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-2 years, based on document verification status
To Obtain an Intermediate License:
• 	You must satisfy the requirements (listed in step one) to graduate from
the instruction permit, and hold the instruction permit for at least six
months (182 days) beginning the day after issuance. This includes
having no alcohol-related convictions in the last 12 months and no
traffic convictions in the last six months.
• 	A parent, grandparent, stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer
(with a federal residential job training program) must accompany you
to the license office to verify you have received 40 hours of driving
instruction with your instruction permit.
• 	Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests (if applicable), if previous
results are more than one year old.
• 	Pass the driving test.
License Notes:
• 	Your driver examination record alone is not legal for driving. Be sure to
carry your intermediate license with you.
• 	Seat belts must be worn by the driver and all passengers.
• 	Passenger restrictions outlined below may not be applicable to an
intermediate license holder who is operating in agricultural work-related
activities.
Driving Restrictions:
• 	During the first six months, you may not operate a motor vehicle with
more than one passenger who is under the age of 19 and who is not a
member of your immediate family*.
• 	After the first six months, you may not operate a motor vehicle with more
than three passengers who are under 19 years of age and who are not
members of your immediate family*.
• 	You may not drive alone between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. except to
and from a school activity, job, or an emergency, unless accompanied
by a licensed driver 21 years of age or older.
* Immediate family shall include parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters,
stepbrothers, stepsisters, and adopted or foster children residing in the
driver’s household. Parent shall include a foster parent, stepparent or
adoptive parent. Grandparent shall include a foster grandparent, step-
grandparent or adoptive grandparent.
If you are under 21 years of age, the Department will issue you a license
identifying you as a minor. When you become 21 years old, you may apply
and pay for another driver license (without the minor indication) or wait until
your under-21 driver license expires.
16

-- 18 of 102 --

A Checklist for You
You must have the following documents with you when you apply for a Missouri driver license,
instruction permit, or nondriver ID. Take all the documents with you to a license office when
you apply for your license or permit.
New Missouri Resident Transferring An Out-of-State Driver License
(valid or expired no more than 184 days)
Out-of-State driver license (valid or expired no more than 184 days)
Proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth),
social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri residency*
Note: If you are upgrading your driver license, take the above documents with you to a
MSHP examination location when you take the written, vision, and road sign tests and/or
driving test.
First-Time Applicant
First-Time Applicant Proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name
and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri
residency* driver examination record indicating successful completion of tests (not
required for nondriver ID)
Driver Examination Record (Form 100) indicating successful completion of tests
(not required for nondriver ID)
Renewal License
All drivers renewing will have to show proof of lawful status, identity (must include
full legal name and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable,
and Missouri residency*
Exemption: If you are renewing a non-commercial permit/driver license or nondriver
ID and are age 65 or older may be exempt from presenting documents for place of
birth
*Please refer to the complete list of acceptable documents for a REAL ID-compliant
or non REAL ID-compliant document application on-line at www dor mo gov.
Note: Additional documents and verification of SSN may be required if the
documentation submitted is questionable, or if the license office clerk or MSHP
examiner has reason to question the validity or authenticity of the documents,
or needs further verification. 	17
You are encouraged to study this Driver Guide before you attempt the written
exam. Almost 50 percent of all test-takers fail the first time. You will have a
much better chance of passing your test if you take time to review this guide.
To Graduate to a Full Under-21 Driver License:
• 	Your driving privilege cannot be suspended, revoked, or denied at the
time of application.
• 	You may not have any alcohol-related offenses or traffic convictions
within the last 12 months.
Step Three: Full Driver License (Under 21)
Eligible Age: 18 See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-3 years, based on document verification status
To Obtain the Under-21 Full Driver License:
• 	You must satisfy the requirements for an intermediate license. This
includes having no alcohol-related offenses or traffic convictions in
the last 12 months.
• 	Have a valid intermediate license. Your driving privilege cannot be
suspended, revoked, or denied when you apply for a full driver license.
• 	Pass the vision and road sign recognition tests. (You are not required
to pass the written and driving tests if already completed.)

-- 19 of 102 --

Chapter 2 - The Driver Examination
The Driver Examination
The driver examination consists of a four-part test:
• 	A written test on traffic laws and rules for safe driving
• 	A vision test
• 	A road sign test
• 	A driving test (skills)
You should be prepared to take the driver exam if:
• 	You are applying for a new Missouri driver license.
Note: If you have a driver license from another state that is valid or has
been expired for less than 184 days, and you are applying for the same type
of license in Missouri, you only have to take the vision and road sign tests.
• 	Your Missouri driver license is expired for more than six months (184 days).
• 	The Director of Revenue asks you to take the exam, even if you have
a current driver license.
• 	Your license was revoked because:
○ 	You have too many points on your driving record.
○ 	Because of an Administrative Alcohol action (see Chapter 10).
Where to Take the Exam
The MSHP administers the driver examination. To find the testing center
nearest you, contact the MSHP or the Department. The phone numbers for
the Department and MSHP are at the back of this guide. You can also find
these locations on the MSHP website: http://www mshp dps missouri gov/
MSHPWeb/Root/index html.
Verification of Your Name and Age
Before you can take the driver exam, you must prove your legal name and
age. This identification must also be shown to the Department of Revenue
when applying for a driver license or permit and any time you take the written
or driving tests. (Refer to Chapter 1 for a list of acceptable documents for
verification of name, date of birth, place of birth, social security number, and
Missouri residential address.)
Written Test
Driver License (Class F)
If you are applying for a Class F (operator) license, you must take a 25
question multiple-choice written test. The questions will be on the laws and
methods of driving covered in this Guide. The test is NOT an open book
test. You will not be tested on the information on commercial vehicles in
Chapter 15.
For-Hire License (Class E)
If you are applying for a Class E (for-hire) license, you must take a special
written test. The questions will be on the laws and methods of driving
covered in this Guide but will also include the information on commercial
vehicles found in Chapter 15. The test is NOT an open book test.
Vision Test
You must take an acuity vision test and a peripheral (side) vision test when
you apply for any new or renewal driver license or permit. The standard
minimum acuity is at least 20/40 with either or both eyes. If you wear glasses
18

-- 20 of 102 --

19
or contact lenses, you may need them for the vision test. The standard
minimum peripheral reading is at least 55 degrees in each eye or 85 degrees
in one eye. If you are unable to meet the vision standards as required, you
may be denied a license, or restrictions may be placed on your license.
If you fail the standard vision test, the examiner will give you a vision
exam form that your eye specialist or physician must fill out. If the physician
prescribes glasses or contact lenses to correct your vision, you may have
to wait for the glasses (or contact lenses) before the written and/or driving
tests may be given. If both your natural and corrected acuity vision are
worse than 20/160, or your peripheral combined is worse than 70 degrees,
you cannot take the driving test and cannot have a driver license.
Road Sign Test
The road sign test will check your ability to recognize and understand traffic
signs.
Driving Test
After you pass the written, vision, and road sign tests, you may then take
the driving test. You will take the driving test with a driver license examiner
of the MSHP.
The examiner will check your vehicle for the required equipment. The
examiner will also check your vehicle for its safe operating condition. You
cannot take the test if the vehicle is not properly equipped, or the examiner
believes that giving the test will be dangerous.
You should take the test in a vehicle that is familiar to you. The vehicle must
have:
• Current license plate(s) and a valid inspection sticker.
• Seat belts in proper working order.
• Doors in proper working order for the driver and examiner.
• A clean, safe seat for the examiner.
• Two sets of brakes (parking and a foot brake) in good working order.
• A horn in good working order.
• Proof of financial responsibility.
You will drive, and the examiner will sit beside you. No one else may ride
in the vehicle during the test. Avoid unnecessary conversation with the
examiner, and focus on your driving. Remember the examiner’s job is to
test, not to teach. You must obey all Missouri traffic laws at all times.
The examiner will ask you to find and use the vehicle’s controls, such
as the accelerator, brakes, turn signals, windshield wipers, etc. You will be
tested for:
• Finding the control without searching.
• Using the control correctly.
The examiner will ask you to start driving. You will be tested for:
• Starting the vehicle.
• Releasing the parking brake.
• Looking to see if the way is clear.
• Giving the proper signal.
• Driving smoothly and at the correct speed.

-- 21 of 102 --

20
The examiner will tell you where to drive, turn, stop, etc.
After the examiner tells you what to do, you will have enough time to look
for traffic and to drive as asked. You will be asked to do the following:
1 	Start and stop the vehicle. You will be tested for:
• 	The smoothness and safety of your starts and stops.
• 	Your reaction time.
• 	Your control of the vehicle when stopping.
2 Park parallel to the curb, in a space 25 feet long and seven feet wide.
You will be tested for:
• 	The position of your vehicle before backing.
• 	Whether or not you bump into the space markers.
• 	Moving into the space smoothly and at the right speed.
• 	Parking no more than 18” from the curb.
• 	Parking near the center of the space.
• 	Ability to park the vehicle within two minutes.
• 	Turning the wheels in the correct direction for parking.
• 	Checking traffic and signaling before you leave the parking space.
3 Backing. You will be tested for:
• 	Looking over your right shoulder to see through the rear glass.
• 	Whether your vehicle backs in a straight line or weaves.
• 	Staying in the proper lane of traffic.
• 	Backing at the right speed.
4 Make at least two right and two left turns. You will be tested for:
• 	Driving in the correct lane for turning.
• 	Giving the proper turn signal at the proper time.
• 	Turning into the proper lane.
• 	Making proper traffic checks.
• 	Turning at the right speed.
• 	Your control of the vehicle.
5 Park on a hill. You will be tested for:
• 	Your control of the vehicle.
• 	Parking no more than 18” from the curb.
• 	Leaving your vehicle in park or the correct gear.
• 	Turning the front wheels in the correct direction for parking.
• 	Setting the parking brake.
• 	Checking traffic and signaling.
6 Enter and leave intersections You will be tested for:
• 	Understanding and obeying the traffic signs and lights.
• 	Your speed when approaching an intersection.
• 	Your awareness of the traffic around you.
• 	Driving in the correct lane.
• 	Yielding the right-of-way without blocking traffic.
• 	Making a full stop at the proper place at stop signs.
7 Understand and obey traffic signs and signals. You will be tested for:
• 	Noticing and obeying traffic signs and signals.

-- 22 of 102 --

21
The examiner will watch for your use of good driving rules You will be
tested for:
• The distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front of you.
• Your speed while driving.
• Driving in the proper lane and obeying lane markings.
• Your awareness of the traffic around you.
• Yielding the right-of-way when necessary.
Your Grade
Throughout the driving test, the examiner will subtract points for any driving
errors you make. If you lose more than 30 points, you will fail the test. You
will also fail the test if you:
• 	Are in a crash with another vehicle and it is your fault;
• 	Hit a pedestrian;
• 	Drive so dangerously you might have caused a traffic crash;
• 	Violate a traffic law; or
• 	Refuse to drive as the examiner asks.
When you pass the driving skills test, you will be given a form with your test
results. Before you drive, you must apply and obtain a license at a license
office. The test result form itself is not valid for driving.
Failing the Driving Test
If you fail the driving test, the examiner will suggest that you practice
before retaking the test. You may take only one driving test per day. If
you fail the driving test three times, no further tests will be allowed without
written authorization from the Department. Information regarding the test
failures will be transmitted to the Department of Revenue. You will receive
a letter from the Department requiring additional behind-the-wheel driver
training. You must send proof of the additional driver training administered
by an eligible driver and obtain an approval to test from the Department of
Revenue before you will be allowed to take the driving test again.
Fraud
It is a crime to commit fraud. Anyone who makes a false unsworn statement
or affidavit or who commits or assists another person in committing fraud or
deception during any examination process for a Missouri license, permit, or
nondriver ID, is guilty of fraud. Fraud is a Class “A” misdemeanor that may
result in the loss of your driving privilege for up to one year.
Some examples of fraud could include cheating, or using or attempting to
use any recording, photographic, or two-way communicating device during
any testing process.

-- 23 of 102 --

Your highest duty as a motorist is to drive your vehicle carefully and prudently.
Your speed and manner of driving must create a safe environment for yourself
and other road users, including pedestrians, cyclists, and other motorists.
Right-of-Way
Where vehicles or pedestrians are likely to meet one another, and there
are no signs or signals to regulate traffic, there are rules that say who must
yield the right-of-way. These rules tell drivers who goes first and who must
wait in different traffic situations.
The law says who must yield the right-of-way; it does not give any driver
the right-of-way. You must do everything you can to prevent striking a
pedestrian or another vehicle, regardless of the circumstances.
Passing
Passing is a dangerous maneuver where the dangers are compounded
by intersections, other vehicles within an intersection and two-lane roads
(Refer to No Passing Zones in Chapter 3).
If you are caught speeding or passing in a construction zone or work zone on
Missouri state roadways, you could be fined a minimum of $250 for the first
offense and a minimum of $300 for a second or subsequent offense in addition
to any other fine authorized by law according to Section 304 582, RSMo.
Use the same care when passing a pedestrian or cyclist as when passing a
motor vehicle. You may need to slow down and wait for a safe opportunity to
pass a pedestrian or cyclist, just as you would for any other slow-moving traffic.
Passing on the Right
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
• When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
• Upon a city street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two
or more lines of vehicles in each direction;
• Upon a one-way street; or
• Upon any highway outside of a city with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width and clearly marked for four or more lanes of traffic.
In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or
main traveled portion of the roadway (shoulder)
Passing on the Left
No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions when:
• Approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the
driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the
event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction;
• The view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge,
viaduct, or tunnel;
• Approaching within 100 feet of or at any intersection or railroad grade
crossing; or
• There is a solid yellow line.
Chapter 3 - Rules of the Road
22

-- 24 of 102 --

23
Intersections
The following right-of-way rules apply at intersections:
• Drivers must yield where necessary to avoid striking pedestrians who are
legally crossing the road;
• Drivers crossing a sidewalk, entering or exiting a driveway, alley, or
parking lot must yield to pedestrians. It is illegal to drive on a sidewalk
except to cross;
• Drivers turning left must yield to oncoming vehicles going straight;
• At a four-way stop, the driver reaching the intersection first may proceed
before the other drivers (after coming to a complete stop);
• Drivers entering a road from a driveway, alley, or roadside must yield to
vehicles already on the main road;
• At an intersection where there is no stop sign or traffic signal (with the
exception of roundabouts), drivers must yield to vehicles coming from the
right; and
• When approaching a roundabout intersection, always yield to traffic in
the circle and pedestrians in the crosswalks. Wait for a gap in traffic
before entering.
Emergency Vehicles
You must yield the right-of-way to police, fire, ambulance, or any other
emergency vehicles using a siren or air horn, and a red or blue flashing light.
Pull over to the right edge of the road, or as near to the right as possible,
when you see or hear an emergency vehicle approaching from any direction.
If you are in an intersection, drive through the intersection before you pull
over. Remain stopped until the emergency vehicle passes. Follow any
instructions given over the emergency vehicle’s loudspeaker. Emergency
vehicles may follow each other so proceed only when the way is clear.
When approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted red or
red and blue lights, you must:
• Proceed with caution, and if it is safe to do so, make a lane change into
a lane not adjacent to the stationary vehicle (if on a roadway having at
least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same
direction as the approaching vehicle); or
• Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining
a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would be unsafe or
impossible.
For more information regarding the “Move Over Law” see page 93.
School Buses
When a school bus stops to load or unload school children, the driver
activates the mechanical and electrical signaling devices to notify other
drivers of an impending stop. Amber warning lights will flash 500 feet
before the bus comes to a designated stop. When the school bus is
stopped, the alternate flashing red lights and the stop signal arm are
activated. Oncoming and following traffic must stop before they reach the
bus when these signals are activated. You must stop:
• On a two-lane road where the vehicles travel in either direction.
• On a two-lane road that is a one
way street.

-- 25 of 102 --

No driver of a school bus shall
take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway
consisting of four or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a
median or barrier, in such a manner
as to require the passengers to cross
more than two lanes of traffic. The following are situations when you do not
have to stop:
• When you are traveling the opposite direction of a school bus on a highway
divided by a median where the vehicles traveling one direction are on a
totally separate road from the vehicles traveling the opposite direction;
• When you are traveling the opposite direction of a school bus on a
highway containing four or more lanes of traffic; or
• When a school bus is stopped in a loading zone (at a school) where
students are not permitted to cross the roadway.
After stopping for a school bus that is unloading school children, watch
for school children walking along the side of the road. You must remain
stopped until the bus moves or the bus driver signals for you to proceed.
Proceed with caution.
Hand and Vehicle Signals
Before you stop, turn or change lanes, let the other drivers know what you
are going to do by signaling. You can signal with your hand and arm or
with your vehicle’s turn signals and brake lights. You should signal at least
100 feet before you turn so the other drivers can be ready. Check your
vehicle’s turn signals often to ensure they are working properly.
The pictures below show the correct hand signals to use when turning or
stopping.
Turns
As a good driver, you should get into the proper turn lane and signal at
least 100 feet before you turn. Before you make any turn, you should look
both ways for oncoming traffic or pedestrians.
If there are no signs or lane markings to control turning, you should turn from
the lane that is closest to the direction you want to go, and turn into the lane
closest to the one you came from. This way, you will cross the fewest lanes
of traffic. When making turns, go from one lane to the other as smoothly as
possible without crossing lane lines or interfering with traffic. Once you have
completed your turn, you can change to another lane if you need to.
24

-- 26 of 102 --

25
U-Turns
You should only make a U-turn when it is safe. U-turns should not be
made on any curve or near the crest of a hill when your vehicle may not be
seen by other drivers. Some towns and cities do not allow U-turns. Never
make a U-turn at a location that is marked with a “No U-Turn” sign or at an
intersection controlled by a traffic signal or police officer.
Right Turns
On right turns, avoid swinging wide to the left
before turning. If you swing wide, the driver
behind you may think you are changing lanes
or going to turn left, and may try to pass you
on the right. If you swing wide as you complete
the turn, drivers who are in the far lane will not
expect to see you there and you could cause a
crash.
Left Turns
When making a left turn, avoid cutting the
corner so sharply that you run into someone
approaching from the left. However, you must
leave room for oncoming vehicles to turn left
in front of you.
One-Way Street onto a Two-Way Street
Begin the turn in the left lane. Enter the two-
way road to the right of its yellow dividing
line. If the two-way road is a four-lane road,
you may enter it in the right lane if that lane
is free of traffic.
Two-Way Street Onto a One-Way Street
Begin the turn with your left wheel as close
as possible to the yellow dividing line. If the
one-way road has two lanes, turn into its left
lane or right lane, whichever is free of traffic.
Two-Way Street onto a Two-Way Street
Begin the turn with your left wheels as close
as possible to the yellow dividing line. Enter
the road to the right of its center line. If the
road onto which you are turning is a four-lane
road, you may enter it in the right lane if the
right lane is free of traffic.

-- 27 of 102 --

Multiple Left-Turn Lanes
Some streets may have more than one lane
marked for left turns. If you are turning from
the left side, left-turn lane, enter the left lane
on the right of the yellow dividing line. If you
are turning from the right side, left-turn lane,
enter the right lane.
Two-Way Left-Turn Lanes
Some streets have a center lane marked
as a two-way left-turn lane. Only enter this
lane when preparing to slow down or
stop before making a left turn from the
main roadway. Do not use this lane as
travel lane (a vehicle may not travel in
this lane for more than 500 feet), and
do not use this lane when entering the
roadway from a side street.
Roundabout Intersections
General Information
Roundabouts are a traffic control device that may
be used as an alternative to signalized and all-way
stop intersections. Statistically roundabouts are
safer than traditional intersections because they
reduce fatal and injury crashes by reduction of
speeds and removing left-turns in front of
opposing traffic. A roundabout uses a circular
island in the center to control the flow of traffic
through the intersection. Roundabouts feature
yield traffic signs at all entering roadway legs.
Yield control creates efficient traffic flow and
often less delay at the intersection. They reduce
pollution and fuel use due to fewer stops and
hard accelerations. At a roundabout, drivers who
approach the intersection make a slight right turn to
go counterclockwise around a circular center island.
The driver may then either exit the roundabout onto a different roadway, or
continue on the same roadway. When approaching a roundabout, always
yield to traffic in the circle, bicyclists, and pedestrians in the crosswalks.
Approaching the roundabout:
• Slow down before entering the roundabout.
• For multi-lane roundabouts, observe roadside signs and pavement
markings to direct you into the correct lane.
• Look to your left as you drive towards the entrance, yield to traffic
already in the roundabout, bicyclists, and pedestrians in the crosswalk.
• Enter when there is a gap in traffic and merge with the other flow of
vehicles.
• NEVER make a left turn to enter a roundabout.
26

-- 28 of 102 --

Traveling through a roundabout:
• Always stay to the right of the center island.
• Vehicles within the roundabout have the right of way.
• DO NOT stop within a roundabout unless it is the only way to avoid a
crash.
• DO NOT change lanes within a roundabout.
• Give special consideration to trucks, trailers and other large vehicles.
They may need to utilize more than one lane within a roundabout.
• DO NOT attempt to pass any vehicles especially large trucks.
• If you miss your exit, continue through the roundabout until you reach
your appropriate exit.
• When exiting, watch for pedestrians and bicyclists crossing the street.
Exiting the roundabout:
• Maintain a slow speed to avoid losing control or striking traffic islands.
• Use your right turn signal to let others know you are exiting.
• Do not accelerate until you are beyond the pedestrian crossing at the exit.
Emergency Vehicles
Always yield to emergency vehicles. DO NOT enter a roundabout if an
emergency vehicle is approaching. NEVER stop while inside a roundabout.
If an emergency vehicle approaches while you are in the roundabout, exit
immediately and pull to the right.
Truck Apron
Large trucks need more space when driving in a roundabout. A truck apron,
also known as off-tracking, is the paved area on the inside of the roundabout
for the rear wheels of large trucks to use when turning. Truck aprons are not
to be used by cars, SUVs or pickup trucks.
J-Turn Intersections
The J-turn is an alternative to traditional
roadway intersections on a four-lane
highway. Instead of motorists crossing
fast-moving lanes of traffic to get to the opposing lanes, drivers at a J-turn
intersection turn right in the same direction of traffic, merge into the far left
lane, and then make a left turn in the direction they intend to travel.
Local Ordinances
Local governments may make traffic ordinances in addition to laws made
by the state. You must obey any traffic sign or regulation whether set by a
municipality, county, or the state. Cities and towns may have regulations to
do the following:
• Set speed limits;
• Set one-way streets;
• Set stop signs at intersections;
• Prohibit commercial vehicles from using certain streets;
• Control parking by installing meters or by some other reasonable method;
• Control turns;
• Require the use of turn signals, brake lights, and horns on all motor vehicles;
and/or
• Prohibit the use of sound-producing warning devices.
27

-- 29 of 102 --

Some things you should know when sharing the road with motorcycles:
• Motorcycles are often overlooked by motorists.
• It is not always easy to judge the speed or distance of a motorcycle.
• On residential streets, especially those with parked cars, travel at or
below the speed limit, depending on sight distance.
• Motorcyclists change speed and lane position when encountering bad
road conditions, such as manhole covers, diagonal railroad tracks, road
debris, or in strong winds. Be ready to react.
• You should not share a lane with a motorcycle. The motorcyclist needs
the entire lane for safety reasons.
• When you are passing, give motorcycles a full lane width. Do not
squeeze past these road users. Wait for a clear stretch of road before
passing a cyclist in a lane too narrow to share.
Safety Tips for Motorcycle Riders
• The law requires you to wear a helmet. Wearing a safety-certified helmet
can prevent serious head injuries or death.
• Be sure your motorcycle is in safe condition and has all the equipment
required by law.
• Make sure motorists see you. Wear bright colored clothes and stay out
of a vehicle’s blind spots. Use proper lights and reflectors when riding
after dark.
• Make sure you signal before you slow down, change lanes or turn. Before
merging, changing lanes, or turning, scan behind and in front to ensure
that it is safe to make this maneuver. Do so in plenty of time and in
cooperation with other drivers who will be affected by your move. If it is
not safe, continue on a straight course and scan repeatedly. Only move
once it is safe.
• Be careful when passing to the left of a parked or moving vehicle. You
should leave three to four feet of clearance to avoid suddenly opened
car doors or to allow for a vehicle to swerve.
• Be extra careful at intersections. Do not assume your right-of-way when
there is a vehicle approaching. Be aware that motor vehicle drivers
may not see you approaching the intersection, or may believe that you
are moving at a slower speed than you are.
• Keep a steady line and be predictable as a courtesy to other traffic and
to increase your personal safety.
Motorcycle Drivers Need a Driver License
To drive any motorcycle on the public streets, you must have a valid driver
license with a motorcycle endorsement or a motorcycle license.
Trucks are not large cars. Whether they are accelerating, braking, climbing
a hill, switching lanes, or turning onto a side street, tractor-trailer trucks
must perform certain maneuvers that drivers of automobiles do not.
28
Chapter 4 - Sharing The Road
Sharing The Road With Motorcycles
Sharing The Road With Large Trucks

-- 30 of 102 --

29
A typical tractor-trailer combination, a power unit pulling a loaded semi-
trailer hinged to its rear end, may weigh up to 80,000 pounds. Depending
on the trailer length, the total length of the combination may exceed 90 feet.
On the busiest intercity routes, a motorist may encounter double or even
triple-trailer combinations sometimes exceeding 100 feet in length.
Any motorist who has driven behind one of these trucks at a traffic light
knows that a semi-trailer combination accelerates slowly. The truck may
have to go through ten gears to reach the speed limit. The truck may have
two- or three-times more power under the hood than a car does, but with up
to 70,000 pounds of trailer and cargo behind it, a truck engine must move 30
or 40 times more weight than a car engine. (Published with permission from
John Deere Transportation Services, Sharing the Road, Deere & Co., 1996.)
To improve safety for all road users, please consider this information.
• Do not enter a roadway in front of a large vehicle. Avoid changing lanes
in front of a large vehicle if you are turning off the roadway.
• If you are driving behind a truck or a bus and cannot see the driver in his
or her rearview mirrors, the driver of that vehicle cannot see you.
• A truck or bus has blind spots on each side, in the rear and in the front
where an automobile cannot be seen. These blind spots are referred to
as the “No-Zone ” Do not drive in the No-Zone except when absolutely
necessary. You should not
drive alongside large vehicles
for prolonged periods at any
time. Tailgating a truck is also
dangerous. Leave any large
vehicle a cushion of safety.
• It takes longer to pass a truck. After you pass, make sure you can see
the cab of the truck in your rearview mirror before reentering the lane.
Maintain your speed and signal when reentering the lane. Do not slow
down once you are in front of the truck.
• When traveling up or down steep grades, large vehicles must drive slowly
in the right lane. Avoid driving your car in the right lane going up or down
hills on divided or multi-lane roadways when interacting with large trucks.
When you are near truck weigh stations, avoid driving in the right lane so
slow-moving trucks can easily merge back onto the roadway.
• Vehicles carrying hazardous materials must stop at all railroad crossings.
Be prepared.
• Because of their size, large trucks may swing out to the left as the first
step in making a right turn. When following a tractor-trailer, observe its
turn signals before trying to pass.
• Tractor-trailers take longer to stop than cars traveling at the same speed.
The average passenger car traveling at 55 mph can stop in about 130
140 feet, almost half the length of a football field. A fully loaded tractor-
trailer may take almost 400 feet to come to a complete stop.
• Cutting off a truck in traffic or on the highway is particularly dangerous. If
you need to make a turn or lane change, take a moment to slow down
and turn behind the truck—it will only take you a few extra seconds.

-- 31 of 102 --

• Never underestimate the size and speed of an approaching tractor-trailer.
Because of its large size, a tractor-trailer often appears to be traveling more
slowly than its actual speed. Car-truck collisions can occur at intersections
when the driver of the car does not realize how close the truck is or how
quickly it is approaching.
As soon as you step out of your vehicle, you become a pedestrian. As
a pedestrian, you should know your rights and responsibilities, and as a
driver you should know the law when pedestrians are around.
As a pedestrian, you should know
When you are facing a “Walk” signal or a green light, you have
the right-of-way. You may begin to cross the road after you
make sure all drivers see you and stop for you.
Do not begin to cross the street when you are facing a “Don’t
Walk” signal or a red or yellow light. If the flashing “Don’t Walk”
sign appears when you are crossing the street, you may finish
crossing the street.
You should cross the road at an intersection or a crosswalk when:
• You are in a business district.
• You are between two closely spaced intersections with traffic lights.
Otherwise, you may cross the road in the middle of the block without a
crosswalk being careful when stepping out between two parked vehicles.
You must yield the right-of-way to all traffic when crossing in the middle of
a block. Walk facing traffic when no sidewalk is available.
You should not stand in a traffic lane to speak to a driver for any length of
time, as this could cause an crash. Instead, you should wait for the driver to
pull over to a safe parking spot, and you should remain on the curb side of
the vehicle.
As a Driver, You Should Know
In some situations, pedestrians are required by law to yield to vehicles.
In other situations, vehicles are required to yield to pedestrians. In all
situations, whether the pedestrians are obeying the law or not, you must
drive carefully, reduce your speed if needed, and do your best to avoid
endangering pedestrians.
Even when you are facing a green light you must yield the right-of-way to
all pedestrians in the intersection. Never assume you have the right-of-way.
Do not assume pedestrians see you and will stop for you.
Do not pass a vehicle that has stopped or slowed down for a pedestrian.
Watch out for kids. Children will run out into the road without looking for
traffic. So, be extra careful when you drive near schools, playgrounds,
parks, or in residential areas. You must obey a slower speed limit in a
school zone when lights are flashing or children are present. At a school
crossing where there is a traffic patrol, stop and yield if a traffic patrol
member signals you to do so.
30
Sharing The Road With Pedestrians

-- 32 of 102 --

The following laws or rules also apply:
• Drivers must always yield the right-of-way to persons who are blind.
When a pedestrian is crossing a street or highway guided by a dog or
carrying a white cane (or a white cane with a red tip), vehicles must
come to a complete stop.
• Drivers must yield when a pedestrian is in a marked or unmarked
crosswalk on or approaching their side of the road.
• As you prepare for a right turn, especially on a red traffic signal, be
cautious of pedestrians (or bicyclists) approaching on your right.
• Drivers should not block the crosswalk when stopped at a red traffic
signal. Drivers should not cross a sidewalk or crosswalk without first
yielding to pedestrians
Some things you should know when sharing the road with mopeds or bicycles:
Most collisions with bicycles and mopeds happen at intersections, where
smaller, slower bicycles and mopeds are especially easy to overlook. Scan
carefully for bicycles and mopeds before proceeding through an intersection,
giving them the same consideration you would any other vehicle.
• Bicycles are often overlooked by motorists.
• It is not always easy to judge the speed or distance of a bicycle.
• Crashes with wrong-way bicyclists frequently occur when a motorist
wants to turn right onto a main road and is only looking left for
approaching traffic. Be sure to look right and check for wrong-way
bicyclists on the road or sidewalk before proceeding.
• On residential streets, especially those with parked cars, travel at or
below the speed limit.
• If you are following a bicyclist and need to make a right turn, slow down
and remain behind the cyclist until you are able to turn.
• Cyclists often travel at surprisingly fast speeds. If you need to make a
left turn, yield to oncoming bicyclists unless you are absolutely sure you
can make the turn before the cyclist reaches the intersection.
• Bicyclists change speed and lane position when encountering bad road
conditions, such as manhole covers, diagonal railroad tracks, drain
grates, road debris, or in strong winds. Be ready to react.
• When you are passing, give bicycles and mopeds a full lane width. Do
not squeeze past these road users. The bicycle is generally a slow
moving vehicle and this may require you to slow down. Wait for a clear
stretch of road before passing a cyclist in a lane too narrow to share.
• Check for passing bicyclists before opening your car door into a traffic
lane or bicycle lane.
• A bicycle lane is a portion of a roadway designated by striping to be used
by bicycles. You may cross a bicycle lane when turning or when entering
or leaving the roadway. You must yield to bicyclists in a bicycle lane.
Where to Ride Mopeds and Bicycles
On public streets and highways, you have the same rights and responsibilities
as a motor vehicle operator. Always ride with traffic, never against it. When
operating at less than the posted speed or traffic flow, generally ride as
31
Sharing the Road with Mopeds and Bicycles

-- 33 of 102 --

32
near to the right side of the roadway as is safe. The right edge of the road
often has hazards like ditches, gutters, sand, and gravel shoulders. Leave
space between yourself and these hazards as needed for safety.
You may move more toward the middle or left of the lane or roadway, as
appropriate when:
• Making a left turn;
• Avoiding hazards;
• The lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle; or
• There is a right-turn-only lane and you are going straight.
Always check traffic, and signal before changing lanes or changing your
position within a lane. On a one-way street, bicyclists may also choose to
ride as far left as is safe.
The law does not allow you to ride a moped on any part of the federal
interstate highway system.
Safety Tips for Moped and Bicycle Riders
• State law does not require you to wear a helmet. However, wearing a
safety-certified helmet can prevent serious head injuries or death.
• Be sure your bike is in safe condition and has all the equipment required
by law.
• Make sure motorists see you. Wear bright colored clothes and stay out
of a vehicle’s blind spots. Use proper lights and reflectors when riding
after dark.
• Make sure you signal before you slow down, change lanes, or turn.
Before merging, changing lanes, or turning, scan behind and in front to
ensure that it is safe to make this maneuver. Do so in plenty of time and
in cooperation with other drivers who will be affected by your move. If it
is not safe, continue on a straight course and scan repeatedly and only
move once it is safe. In conditions of heavy traffic, less proficient bicyclists
may find it easier to wait near the curb for a safe gap to appear.
• Be careful when passing to the left of a parked or moving vehicle. You
should leave three to four feet of clearance to avoid suddenly-opened
car doors or to allow for a vehicle to swerve.
• Be extra careful at intersections. Do not assume your right-of-way when
there is a vehicle approaching. Be aware that motor vehicle drivers may
not see you approaching the intersection, or may believe that you are
moving at a slower speed than you are.
• Keep a steady line, and be predictable as a courtesy to other traffic and
to increase your personal safety.
• For teen and adult bicyclists, studies show that riding on the street with
traffic, not against it (following the same traffic rules that other vehicles
do), is far safer than riding on the sidewalk.
Moped Drivers Need a Driver License
To drive any motorized bicycle such as a moped on the public streets, you
must have a valid driver license. A motorized bicycle is defined as any two-
wheeled or three-wheeled device having an automatic transmission and
a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than 50 cubic centimeters,
which produces less than three gross brake horsepower, and is capable of
32

-- 34 of 102 --

33
propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per
hour on level ground.
Equipment Required on Mopeds and Bicycles
You do not have to register your moped or bicycle and it does not have
to be inspected. However, Missouri law requires certain equipment on
mopeds and bicycles.
Brakes — Your brakes must be able to stop you within 25 feet when
traveling ten mph.
Lights and Reflectors — The number of bicycle-auto crashes rises
dramatically between sunset and sunrise. Almost all such crashes can
be prevented with proper bicycle lights and reflectors. You must have the
following lights and reflectors when riding your bicycle from ½ hour after
sunset until ½ hour before sunrise:
• A White Light on the front of your bicycle or carried by you that other
drivers can see from 500 feet.
• A Rear Red Reflector, at least two square inches, or a Rear Red Light
that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low beam
headlights at 600 feet.
• Reflective Material or Lights on the pedals, crank arms, shoes, or
lower legs that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low
beam headlights at 200 feet.
• Reflective Material and/or Lights on Each Side of the Bicycle or
bicyclist that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low beam
headlights at 300 feet. This does not apply to mopeds that comply with
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Regulations.
Sharing the Road with Electric Bicycles
An electric bicycle as defined in 301 010 RSMo is a bicycle equipped with
fully operable pedals, a saddle or seat for the rider, and an electric motor
of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one of the three
classes:
• Class 1: Bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only
when the rider is pedaling and that cease to provide assistance when the
bicycle reaches the speed of twenty miles per hour.
• Class 2: Bicycle equipped with a motor used exclusively to propel the
bicycle and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches the speed of twenty miles per hour.
• Class 3: Bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only
when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when
the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty-eight miles per hour.
Operation of an electric bicycle as defined by 301.010 RSMo does not
require the rider to hold an operator license or motorcycle license.
Funeral Processions
If you are driving a vehicle in a funeral procession, you should follow the
vehicle in front of you as closely as is practical and safe. Every vehicle in
the procession must use its flashing emergency lights. An organized funeral
procession has the right-of-way at all intersections regardless of any traffic
control device, except for emergency vehicles or when directed otherwise
by law enforcement officials.

-- 35 of 102 --

34
The following rules apply to all drivers not involved in an organized funeral
procession.
• Do not drive between the vehicles that are part of the procession when
they are in motion.
• Do not join a funeral procession for the purpose of obtaining the right-of-way.
• Do not attempt to pass any vehicle in the procession except where a
passing lane has been specifically provided.
• Do not enter an intersection in which a procession is going through a
red signal light, unless you may do so without crossing the path of the
funeral procession.
Road Rage
Road rage is an uncontrolled display of anger by the operator of a motor
vehicle (usually in response to another driver’s actions), which can result in
property damage or personal injury.
Drivers prone to road rage are usually aggressive individuals who fail to
follow courteous driving practices. Some examples of behavior associated
with road rage include:
– Beeping the horn 	– Pursuing another vehicle
– Flashing the headlights 	– Making aggressive gestures
– Forcing another vehicle to pull over 	– Verbally abusing another driver
– Bumping into another vehicle 	– Tailgating another vehicle
– Threatening another driver 	– Braking or slowing suddenly
– Damaging a vehicle intentionally 	– Deliberate obstruction
– Assaulting another driver 	– “Cutting off” or swerving
As our society has become more accustomed to it, road rage has become
a “normal” part of our driving environment. These habits can be unlearned,
but it takes self discipline on the part of drivers.
When confronted with any of the behaviors associated with road rage,
you should try to
• Remain calm and do not react with similar behavior.
• Identify the location (for example: intersection, mile marker, direction the
vehicle was traveling, etc.).
• Get a physical description of the driver.
• Get a description of the vehicle (approximate year, make, model, color,
license plate number, etc.).
• Report the incident to the nearest local authorities as soon as possible.
• If you have a cellular phone, exit the roadway to a safe area and dial *55
(or 911 if you are in a metropolitan area).
Drunk Drivers
If you believe you have seen a drunk driver, tell the police immediately.
You may be saving someone’s life. Helpful information to provide the officer
includes the license plate number of the vehicle, a physical description of
the car and driver, and the vehicle’s location.
About Littering
Littering is against the law. It is unsightly and may cause a traffic crash.
For example, a lit cigarette thrown out a car window can be blown into the
vehicle behind you, causing property damage or personal injury.
If a judge finds you guilty of littering, you may have to pay up to a $1,000
fine and/or spend up to one year in jail.

-- 36 of 102 --

35
Chapter 5 - Parking
Drivers are responsible for making sure their vehicles do not become
hazards after they have been parked. Whenever you park your vehicle, be
sure it is in a place that is far enough from any travel lane to avoid interfering
with traffic and visible to vehicles approaching from either direction.
• Always park in a designated area if possible.
• On one-way streets, you may normally park on either the right or left
side of the street.
• Always set your parking brake when you park. Leave the vehicle in
gear if it has a manual transmission, or in park if it has an automatic
transmission.
• Check traffic before you open the door. Get out of the vehicle on the
curb side if you can. If you have to use the street side, check traffic
before you get out. Always have passengers, especially children, exit
the vehicle on the curb side. Check for bicyclists, who often travel on
the right-hand side of the travel lanes, near parked cars. Shut the door
as soon as you can after getting out.
• Never leave the keys in a parked vehicle. Lock the doors whenever you
leave your vehicle if it will be out of your sight at any time.
• If you must park on a roadway, park your vehicle as far away from traffic
as possible. If there is a curb, park as close to it as you can.
• When you park on a hill, turn your wheels sharply towards
the side of the road. This way, if your vehicle starts to roll
downhill, it will roll away from traffic (refer to Parking on Hills).
No-Parking Zones
There are many areas where you cannot park. Check for signs that may
prohibit or limit parking. Some parking restrictions are indicated by colored
curb markings. Do not park:
• In an intersection.
• On a crosswalk or sidewalk.
• Across a driveway entrance.
• On the left side of a two-way street.
• Alongside a curb that is painted yellow.
• On a bridge.
• Blocking a fire hydrant.
• Blocking the normal traffic flow or creating a hazard to other drivers.
• With your vehicle facing against traffic.
When can you park in handicapped parking spaces?
Handicapped parking spaces may only be used when the vehicle displays a
handicapped person placard or license plates, and a physically handicapped
person is the occupant of the motor vehicle at the time of parking, or a
physically handicapped person is being dropped off or picked up.

-- 37 of 102 --

International Symbol of Access
This symbol marks spaces for vehicles operated by or used to
transport people with handicaps. Violators, when convicted,
shall be punished by a fine of no less than fifty dollars
($50) and no more than three hundred dollars ($300).
The law also provides that:
• It is illegal to park in handicapped parking access aisles.
• It is illegal to use a handicapped person’s placard or license plates to
park in designated handicapped parking spaces if the handicapped
person is not being transported at the time.
Parking on Hills
Before leaving your parked vehicle:
• Turn your wheels in the proper direction (see graphic below);
• Turn off the motor, leaving the vehicle in proper gear;
• Set the emergency or parking brake;
• Remove the keys from the ignition;
• Check your rearview mirror for traffic before stepping out; and
• Lock it and pocket the keys.
Before you drive away from any parking space, be sure to check for traffic
and signal.
Parallel Parking
• Stop even with the vehicle ahead of the parking space about 1½ feet to
the left of that vehicle.
• Turn wheels sharply to the right, and back slowly into the parking space. Be
sure the front of your vehicle does not block passing or oncoming traffic.
• When clear of the front vehicle, turn wheels sharply to the left and
continue backing.
• Turn wheels sharply to the right and pull forward toward the curb. Park in
the center of the parking space.
36

-- 38 of 102 --

Good driving requires you to be observant and aware of your surroundings.
You must look down the road, to the sides, and behind your vehicle. Be
alert for unexpected events. Many crashes occur because drivers do not
pay enough attention to their driving. Do not take your eyes off the road for
more than a few seconds at any one time. For example, if you need to look
at a map, pull safely off the road. Do not try to read the map while you are
driving.
Drive in the Proper Lane
When driving on a highway with a total of two lanes (one lane in each
direction), drive in the right hand lane. You may cross the center line for
passing when there are no oncoming vehicles and no solid yellow line.
On highways with a total of four or more lanes (two or more lanes in each
direction), always keep to the right unless you are passing slower traffic,
letting another driver have room to enter safely, or getting ready to make a
legal left turn.
Controlling Speed
The best way to control your speed is to know how fast you are going.
Check the speedometer often, and pay attention to the posted speed limits.
This is especially true when you leave high speed roads and begin driving
on much slower local roads.
Passing on Highways
Use the left lane only to pass another vehicle You can use the right
lane when passing a vehicle that is making a left turn. Never use the
shoulder or unpaved part of the highway to pass.
Before you pass a vehicle in front
of you, make sure you are in a safe
passing zone On four-lane highways,
check the left lane for traffic by using your
left and inside rearview mirrors and briefly
looking over your left shoulder. Looking
over your left shoulder is important because
it allows you to check for “blind spots.”
Blind spots are the spaces you cannot see
with your rearview mirrors. Do not drive in
another vehicle’s blind spot.
• Try to avoid driving on either side and
slightly to the rear of another vehicle.
Either speed up or drop back so the other
driver can see your vehicle more easily.
• When passing another vehicle, get through the other driver’s blind
spot as quickly as you can without exceeding the speed limit The
longer you stay there, the longer you are in danger of having the vehicle
collide with your vehicle.
37
Chapter 6 - Highway Driving

-- 39 of 102 --

38
• Never stay alongside, or immediately behind, a large vehicle such
as a truck or bus. These vehicles have large blind spots and it is hard
for their drivers to see you. If you cannot see the truck driver’s face in
the truck’s side mirror, the truck driver cannot see you. It takes longer to
pass a truck. After you pass, make sure you can see the cab of the truck
in your rearview mirror before reentering the lane. Maintain your speed.
Do not slow down once you are in front of the truck.
If the way is clear, signal that you are changing lanes Pass the other
vehicle quickly and smoothly, being careful not to exceed the speed limit.
Give plenty of room to the vehicle you just passed Do not turn back into the
right lane until you see the passed vehicle in your rearview mirror. Remember to
look over your right shoulder to check your blind spot, and be sure to signal.
Being Passed
If another vehicle begins to pass you, stay in your lane and do not increase
your speed. If many vehicles are passing you in the right lane of a multi-
lane roadway, you are probably going slower than the rest of the traffic.
Unless you will be turning left soon, you should move into the right lane
when the way is clear.
Adjusting to Traffic
Vehicles moving in the same direction and lane, and at the same speed
cannot hit one another. Traffic crashes involving two or more vehicles often
happen when drivers go faster or slower than other vehicles on the road.
If you are going faster than traffic, you will have to keep passing others.
Each time you pass someone, there is a chance for a collision. The vehicle
you are passing may change lanes suddenly, or on a two-lane road, an
oncoming vehicle may appear suddenly. Slow down, and keep pace with
other traffic. Speeding does not save more than a few minutes an hour.
Going much slower than other vehicles can be just as bad as speeding.
It tends to make vehicles bunch up behind you and drivers then become
impatient and pass you. If vehicles are piled up behind you, pull over and
let them pass when it is safe to do so.
Be Aware of the Traffic Around You
Check your rearview mirrors every few seconds to keep track of the
approaching traffic. Make sure other drivers see you. Be sure to keep a safe
distance (refer to Chapter 8) between you and the vehicle in front of you.
Slow Moving Traffic
Some vehicles cannot travel very fast, or have trouble keeping up with the
speed of traffic. If you spot these vehicles early, you have time to change
lanes or slow down safely. Slowing suddenly can cause a traffic crash.
• Watch for large trucks and small, underpowered vehicles on steep
grades or when they are entering traffic. They can lose speed on long
or steep hills and it may take longer for these vehicles to get up to speed
when they enter traffic.

-- 40 of 102 --

Stopping
Never stop on the highway itself. Many highways have rest stops and
service areas.
Be alert so that you know well ahead of time when you will have to stop.
Stopping suddenly is dangerous. Braking quickly could cause you to lose
control of your vehicle. You also make it harder for drivers behind you to
stop without hitting you. Try to avoid panic stops by seeing events well in
advance. By slowing down or changing lanes, you may not have to stop at
all, and if you do, it can be a more gradual and safer stop.
You can stop on the shoulder of the highway in an emergency. If you do,
alert other drivers by turning on your emergency flashers. It is also helpful
to raise the hood, or tie a white cloth to the antenna.
Controlled Access Highways
Many highways have controlled access. This means you can enter or leave
the highway only where there are entrance or exit ramps.
Entering The Highway
Entrance ramps are short,
one-way ramps used to get
on the highway. At the end
of most entrance ramps is
an acceleration lane. Use
the ramp and acceleration
lane to increase your speed
to match the speed of the vehicles on the highway.
As you are speeding up, watch for an opening in the highway traffic. Switch
on your turn signal, and pull smoothly into the traffic. DO NOT stop at the
end of an acceleration lane unless traffic is very heavy and you have to
stop.
Drivers already on the highway should give you room to enter, but if they
don’t, do not force your way onto the highway. You must yield the right-of-
way to them, even if that means stopping at the end of an acceleration lane.
Leaving the Highway
Exit ramps are short, one-way ramps. At the beginning of most exit ramps
is a deceleration lane. Make sure you are in the proper lane to leave the
highway well in advance of the deceleration lane.
Use the deceleration lane and the exit ramp to slow down when leaving the
highway. Be sure you obey the speed advisory sign on the exit ramp. Be
ready to stop or yield at the end of the ramp.
If you miss your exit, DO
NOT stop, back up, or try to
turn around on the highway.
You will have to get off the
highway at the next exit and
come back to the exit you
missed.
39

-- 41 of 102 --

Interchanges
Where two busy highways meet, there may be interchanges with entrance
and exit ramps. An interchange can be confusing if you have not driven on
it before. A Diverging Diamond Interchange, DDI, is a relatively new design
that you may encounter while driving in Missouri. When driving through
a DDI, you will travel on the left side of the roadway for a short distance.
There are directional signs on all interchanges that can help you determine
where you need to go.
Some Common Interchange Designs:
Watch Out for “Highway Hypnosis”
Highway hypnosis can make you feel sleepy and unaware of the traffic
around you. Highway hypnosis is caused by the sameness of the road and
traffic. The hum of the wind, tires, and engine also adds to the hypnosis.
You can avoid highway hypnosis by constantly moving your eyes and
watching the traffic and highway signs around you. If you feel sleepy, pull
off the highway. Do not risk falling asleep at the wheel.
Stop Driving When You Feel Sleepy
When you feel tired, it is harder to make decisions and to react to the traffic
around you. You may fall asleep at the wheel. When you feel sleepy, pull
off the highway at the nearest rest stop or service area. If you are really
sleepy, take a nap. Tired drivers are a great danger to themselves, other
drivers, and can be as dangerous as intoxicated drivers.
Emergencies
If your vehicle breaks down on a highway, make sure other drivers can see
you and your vehicle. Traffic crashes occur because a driver did not see a
stalled vehicle until it was too late to stop.
40
Cloverleaf 	Diamond
Directional 	Diverging Diamond

-- 42 of 102 --

41
If possible, use a two-way radio, telephone, or cellular phone to notify
authorities that your vehicle (or someone else’s) has broken down. Many
roadways have signs that tell you the CB channel or telephone number to
call in an emergency. The cellular number to call in an emergency is *55. If
you are having vehicle trouble and have to stop, consider the following:
• If at all possible, get your vehicle off the road and away from traffic.
• Turn on your emergency flashers to show you are having trouble.
• If you cannot get your vehicle off the roadway, try to stop where other
drivers have a clear view of your vehicle. Do not stop just over a hill or
just around a curve.
• Try to warn other drivers that your vehicle is there. Place emergency
flares behind the vehicle. This alerts other drivers to change lanes if
necessary.
• Never stand in the roadway. Do not try to change a tire if it means you
have to be in a traffic lane. Lift the hood or tie a white cloth to the
antenna, side mirror, or door handle to signal an emergency.

-- 43 of 102 --

Pavement Markings on the Road
Lines and symbols on the roadway indicate a number of things to drivers:
where lanes are divided, where you may pass other vehicles, or change
lanes, which lanes to use for turns, where pedestrian walkways are located,
and where you must stop for signs and traffic signals.
Meanings of Pavement Markings
Lines 	— Broken Lines may be crossed in a passing maneuver.
— Solid Lines should not be crossed in a passing maneuver.
Colors — Yellow separates traffic traveling in opposite directions.
— White separates traffic traveling in the same direction.
Direction of Traffic
If the line on the left of you is yellow, the traffic on the other side of the line
is moving in the opposite direction.
When the line on the left of you is white, the traffic is moving in the same
direction. A solid white line marks the right edge of many roads.
The center marking for roads with
four lanes consists of two solid
yellow lines. The yellow lines tell
you the traffic on the other side of
the lines is moving in the opposite
direction. You should never cross
the two solid yellow lines to pass.
No Passing Zones
Two-lane roads may have “no
passing zones” marked with a
solid yellow line. No passing
zones are on hills or curves
where you cannot see far enough
ahead to pass safely. You must complete passing before you enter the no
passing zone.
When you see a solid yellow line on your side of the center line, do not try
to pass. On any two-lane road, never pass if you cannot see the road is
clear for the distance you need to make a pass, even if there is no marking
on the roadway.
Left-Turn Lanes
Some roads have marked left-turn
lanes. Notice the solid yellow lines
and the thick yellow stripes in the
illustration below.
Crosswalks and Stop Lines
When required to stop because of a sign or signal, you must stop before
your vehicle reaches the stop line or, if there is one, the crosswalk.
42
Chapter 7 - Pavement Marking, Traffic Signs, and Signals
NO PASSING ZONE
NO PASSING ZONE

-- 44 of 102 --

Crosswalks define the area where pedestrians are to cross the roadway.
You must yield to pedestrians in or about to enter a crosswalk. Not
all crosswalks are marked. Be alert for pedestrians when crossing
intersections that do not have defined crosswalks.
Dual-Use Lanes
Dual-use lanes have both a turn
arrow and a straight arrow. When
both arrows appear on the electric
traffic signal, you may either turn
or go straight. But if you want to
turn, and only the straight arrow is
showing, you must wait for the turn
arrow.
Shared Center Lanes
Vehicles moving in both directions may use these center lanes for making
left turns (or U-turns when they are permitted). On the pavement, left-turn
arrows for traffic in one direction alternate with left-turn arrows for traffic
coming from the other direction. These lanes are marked on each side by
a solid yellow and dashed yellow lines. Turn from this lane as soon as your
path is clear.
No Lane Markings
When there are no signs or markings to control the use of lanes, there
are rules that indicate which lane is to be used. These rules cover general
driving, passing, and turning.
General Driving — In general, never back a vehicle in any travel lane.
Drivers do not expect a vehicle to be backing towards them and may not
realize it until it is too late. If you miss your turn or exit, do not back up. Go
on to where you can safely turn around. Do not stop in travel lanes for any
reason (confusion, breakdown, or letting out a passenger). Keep moving
until you can safely pull off the road.
On a road with three or more lanes traveling in the same direction, stay in
the right lane except to pass. If there is a considerable amount of traffic
entering the right travel lane, then use the center travel lane.
Passing — On multi-lane roads, the left-most lane is intended to be used
to pass slower vehicles. If you pass on the right, the other driver may have
difficulty seeing you and might suddenly change lanes in front of you.
Never pass on the shoulder. Other drivers will not expect you to be there
and may pull off the road without looking.
Traffic Officers
You must obey traffic officers at all times. If you see a traffic officer giving
directions, do what he or she says and ignore any traffic signs or signals. For
example, if the officer signals for you to stop at a green light, you must stop.
Traffic Control Signals
Traffic controls include traffic signals, traffic signs and pavement markings.
Traffic control also can be provided by law enforcement, highway personnel
or school crossing guards. You must obey directions from these persons.
43

-- 45 of 102 --

Traffic Signals
Traffic signals are lights that tell you when or where to stop and go.
Flashing Signal All Directions
Flashing traffic signals may occur during emergencies, night
time and low traffic volume periods and special events.
Flashing traffic signals have the following meanings:
• 	A flashing red light means the same thing as a stop sign.
• 	A flashing yellow light tells you to slow down and proceed
with caution.
A red light tells you to stop at the stop line, crosswalk, or before the
intersection. Unless you are making a right turn, you must wait for
the signal to turn green before you proceed. After making a
complete stop, you may turn right on a red light if the way is
clear of pedestrians and traffic. However, you must not turn right
on a red light when there is a “No Right Turn On Red” sign posted.
A steady yellow light tells you the traffic signal is changing from
green to red. Stop for a steady yellow light unless you are within
the intersection or are so close that you cannot safely stop before
entering the intersection.
A green light tells you that you can go through the intersection.
However, you must first yield the right-of-way to traffic and
pedestrians who are still in the intersection.
Left Turn Signals
When turning left at a green light, there are three types of
left-turn signal phases:
1. Permissive — Vehicles are given a circular green or a
flashing yellow arrow and required to wait for an adequate
gap in the opposing traffic prior to making their turn.
2. Protected — Vehicles may turn only when they receive a
green arrow while opposing vehicles are stopped by a red
light.
3. Protected/Permissive — Vehicles are given a protected
phase (green arrow), or a permissive (circular green or
flashing yellow arrow) phase, when drivers must choose
an adequate gap in opposing traffic.
A steady red arrow tells you to stop at the stop line, crosswalk,
or before the intersection. You must wait for the signal to turn
green or a flashing yellow arrow before you proceed. However,
you may need to yield to pedestrians.
A steady yellow arrow appears after a green arrow. It tells
you the green arrow will be changing to a circular green light,
a flashing yellow arrow or a red light. You must be ready to
yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic or to stop.
44

-- 46 of 102 --

A flashing yellow arrow tells you that you are allowed to drive
in the direction the arrow is pointing but are required to wait for
an adequate gap in the opposing traffic prior to making your
turn. You must yield to pedestrians.
A green arrow tells you that you can drive in the direction the
arrow is pointing. You must be in the proper lane and the way
must be clear of all traffic and pedestrians.
Dark signals, or traffic signals that aren’t working operate as a four-way stop.
Traffic Signs
Traffic signs tell you traffic rules, hazards, where you are, how to get where
you are going, and where services are located. The shape and color of
these signs give clues to the type of information they provide.
Sign Colors
Sign Shapes
Octagon = Stop
Triangle = Yield
Vertical
Rectangle = Regulatory
Horizontal
Rectangle = Guide
Parks and Recreation
Pentagon = School
Round = Railroad
Crossbuck = Railroad
Pennant = No Passing
Zone
Diamond = Warning
White = Regulatory
Red = Stop, Yield,
or Prohibited
Black = Regulatory
Yellow = Warning
Yellow Green = School
Orange = Construction
Green = Direction & Distance
Blue = Motorist Services
Brown = Public Recreation
& Cultural Interests
45

-- 47 of 102 --

Warning Signs
These signs are yellow with black lettering or symbols and usually diamond
shaped. These signs warn you to slow down and be prepared to stop if
necessary because a special situation or a hazard is ahead. Some common
warning signs are shown below.
Traffic Control
Stop Ahead
There is a stop sign
ahead on the road you
are on. Be prepared to
stop.
Signal Ahead
There is a traffic light
signal ahead on the
road you are on. Be
prepared to stop.
School Crossing
Slow down. Watch for
children crossing the
road. Note: This sign
is being transitioned
to yellow green. This
transition will take
effect within the next
ten years.
Pedestrian Crossing
Yield to pedestrians
walking in the cross-
walk. Slow down.
Traffic Flow
Special Road and Traffic
46
E X I T
M P H
Exit Speed Advisory
The highway exit
ramp has a speed
advisory.
Added Lane
Traffic from another
road will be entering
the road. No merging
is necessary because a
lane has been added.
Begin Divided
Roadway
The road will soon
become two-way
traffic divided by a
median or barrier.
End Divided Roadway
Two-way traffic will no
longer be divided by a
median or barrier.
Merge
Traffic from another
road will be entering
the road. Be prepared
for vehicles to move
into your lane.
Lane Ends/Merge Left
Two lanes of traffic will
soon become one lane
of traffic. If you are in
the right lane you must
merge left, yielding to
traffic driving in the left
lane.

-- 48 of 102 --

Turns and Curves In The Road
47
Large Arrow
May be seen on the outside of a
turn. Slow down for sharp change
of direction of
travel.
Reverse Turn 	Speed Advisory
Curve and turn signs
have an advisory speed
plate that shows the
recommended speed
for the curve or turn.
Although you may feel comfortable
driving at a higher speed in fair
weather, you should never do so in
rain, snow or icy conditions.
Curve
A curve sign is used to
warn of a curve where
the recommended
speed is less than the
posted speed limit for
the highway.
Turn
A turn sign is used to
warn of a sharp turn or
turn where the
recommended
maximum speed is 30
mph or less.
M P H
Chevron
May be used at curves
and turns to add extra
emphasis to slow
down.
Special Road and Traffic Conditions
Slippery When Wet
The road ahead
becomes unusually
slippery in wet weather.
Drive carefully in these
conditions.
Object Marker
Are used to notify
drivers of objects in
the roadway or very
close to the edge of
the roadway. This
sign emphasizes the
need to not stray
outside of the marked
travel lane.
S O FT
S H O U LD ER
Soft Shoulder
The shoulder on the
side of the road ahead
is soft. Do not drive off
the pavement.
Slow Moving Vehicle
A reflective orange
triangle on the rear of
a vehicle means it is
traveling less than 25
mph. You may see this
sign on construction
equipment or farm
vehicles.
Bicycle - Share the
Road
Watch for bicycle
riders traveling in the
same lane as vehicular
traffic.
S H A R E
T H E
R O A D

-- 49 of 102 --

48
Road Intersections
Regulatory Signs
Many regulatory signs are square- or rectangular-shaped and are white,
with black or red letters or symbols. They give you information about rules
for traffic direction, lane use, turning, speed, parking, and other special
situations.
Some regulatory signs have a red circle with a red slash over a symbol.
These indicate you cannot do something, for example, no left turn, or no
U-turn.
Other common types of regulatory signs are:
No Left Turn
No Trucks 	No Bicycles
No Right Turn 	No U-Turn
Intersection
Another road crosses
the road. Watch
carefully for traffic
crossing your path.
RO U N DABO UT
Side Road Ahead
Another road enters
the road from the
direction shown on
the sign.
Roundabout Ahead
A roundabout intersection is ahead. Slow down as required
by the speed restriction sign and follow the road rules for
roundabouts.
T Intersection Ahead
The road you are
traveling does not
continue. You must
turn either right or left.
Side Road Railroad
Crossing
A warning of a railway
crossing very close to
the intersection. Use
caution when crossing
tracks.

-- 50 of 102 --

Stop
A stop sign is red with white letters and has eight sides.
When you see a stop sign, you must come to a full stop.
You must wait until crossing vehicles and pedestrians
have cleared the intersection. You must stop at the stop line
if one is present even if it is located past the stop sign. If
there is no stop line, pull up and stop near the edge of the
intersection, look both ways, and then proceed when it is safe.
a. Stop before the
stop line.
OR...
b. Stop before the
crosswalk.
OR...
c. If there is no
stop line or
crosswalk,
stop before
entering the
intersection.
Yield
A yield sign is triangular. It is red and white with red letters.
It means you must slow down and yield the right-of-way to
traffic in the intersection you are crossing or roadway you are
entering.
Wrong Way
You made a wrong turn and have entered a lane of oncoming
traffic. As quickly and safely as possible, pull off the road, turn
around and go back.
Do Not Enter
When you see this sign at roadway openings, do not enter this
road.
One Way
Traffic on some roadways and ramps is allowed in one
direction only.
Lane Control
These signs use an arrow symbol to tell you which
direction you can go from each lane. The signs are
along the road or hanging over the road.
Y I E L D
D O N O T
E N T E R
O N E WAY
ONLY 	ONLY	ONLY
49

-- 51 of 102 --

50
Speed Limit
Speed limit signs indicate the maximum speed allowed by
law, and do not mean that all parts of the road can be safely
driven at those speeds under all conditions. The speed limit
is the maximum allowable speed in ideal conditions. Adjust
your speed for hills, curves, slippery roadways, limited sight
distance, pedestrians, bicyclists, and slow-moving vehicles.
These conditions may make the posted speed limit unsafe. By
law, when conditions demand it, you must slow down. Interstate
highways also have minimum speed limits. If this minimum speed is too fast
for you, then you should use another route. You may not drive slower than
40 mph on interstate highways under normal roadway conditions.
Keep Right
Some roadway locations require traffic to pass only to the right
side of a feature or obstruction.
Use the following guide unless posted speed limits direct otherwise.
The speed limit in any city, town, or village is 25 mph, unless posted
otherwise. The Missouri Highway and Transportation Commission has the
authority to set speed limits higher or lower than the uniform maximum
speed limits for safety reasons or to expedite the flow of traffic. There are
more than 1,300 miles of interstate highways in Missouri. Their maximum
speed limit is 70 mph. Lower speeds are posted on interstates for safety,
usually in urban areas where interchanges and entering and exiting traffic
are more frequent.
Railroad Crossing
Many railroad crossings have signs or signals to
warn drivers. The round advance warning sign
tells you that you are nearing a railroad crossing.
Never try to beat a train across the tracks. Never
start to cross the tracks until there is room for
your vehicle on the other side of the tracks. It
is not wise to shift gears when crossing railroad
tracks, just in case your vehicle might stall. You may also see a pavement
marking before a crossing. Like the round advance warning sign, pavement
markings tell you that you are nearing a railroad crossing.
S P E E D
L I M I T
7 0
M I N I M U M
4 0
Roadway 	Maximum Speed
Rural interstates and freeways 	70
Rural expressways 	65
Interstate highways, freeways or
expressways within urbanized areas 	60
All other roads and highways not
located in an urbanized area 	60
Lettered roads 	55
50

-- 52 of 102 --

A white, X-shaped sign or “crossbuck” is
located at the railroad crossing. This sign
has the same meaning as a “yield” sign;
therefore, you must yield to trains at
crossings. The sign under the crossbuck
tells you how many tracks cross the road.
At some crossings, along with the crossbuck
sign, you will see side-by-side red lights that
flash alternately. At some crossings there is
also a crossing gate (some with a bell) that
will lower when a train is coming. At both
of these signal-equipped crossings, you
must stop and you cannot cross the tracks
until the train has passed.
When you see any of these signs, SLOW DOWN, look for a train, and be
ready to stop. You must STOP if the red lights are flashing or the gate is
down. You must stop within 15 to 50 feet before the railroad tracks. DO NOT
try to go around the gate.
The red lights may continue to flash after the train has gone by. If there are
two or more tracks, look for a second train before you cross.
Work Zone Signs
Work zone signs are fluorescent orange and indicate some type of work is
being performed on or alongside the roadway. Obey the work zone signs
and be extremely careful when you see these signs. There may be other
traffic control devices or flag persons to help direct you safely through the
work zone.
If you are caught speeding or passing in a construction zone or work zone
on Missouri state roadways, you could be fined a minimum of $250 for the
first offense and a minimum of $300 for a second or subsequent offense in
addition to any other fine authorized by law according to
to Section 304 582,RSMo
The following are the most common work zone signs:
R O A D
W O R K
A H EA D
FRESH OIL
LOOS E
GRAVEL
R I G H T LA N E
C L O S E D
A H EA D
51

-- 53 of 102 --

52
Types of Work Zones
There are several types of work zones that take place on Missouri
roadways. Knowing the difference between these work zones will help
you understand what to expect when driving through them. When driving
through work zones, adhere to these precautions:
• 	Stay Alert! Look for reduced speed limits, narrow driving lanes, and
highway workers
• 	Pay Attention. Do not drive distracted
• 	Obey the work zone signs
• 	Watch for vehicles entering and exiting the work zone
The following are the most common types of work zones a driver on
Missouri roadways could encounter.
Shoulder Work Zone
This is work that takes place on the shoulder or beyond the shoulder. You
should use caution and perform or be alert of the following:
• 	Reduce speed when approaching the work zone
Typical Shoulder Work Setup
Lane Closure
This is work that takes place in the travel lane of a roadway. You should
use caution and perform or be alert of the following:
• 	Merge to the designated lane or a lane that work is not being performed
• 	Reduce speed to the designated work zone speed limit
Typical Lane Closure Setup
52

-- 54 of 102 --

53
Flagging Operation
This is work that takes place on a two-lane, two-way roadway with one lane
closed. A flagger(s) will be present at the beginning and end points of the
work zone providing traffic control to oncoming vehicles. You should use
caution and perform or be alert of the following:
• 	Be prepared to stop as you approach the work zone
• 	Follow the flagger’s instructions
Typical Flagging Operation Setup
Typical Flagging Station Setup
Mobile Work Zone
This is work that takes place in the travel lane of a roadway. Workers may
exit their vehicles briefly to conduct work. You should use caution and
perform or be alert of the following:
• 	Multiple slow moving or stopped work
vehicles
• 	Follow the directional guide of the Flashing
Arrow Panel
• 	Workers that may be on or near the roadway
When approaching the mobile work zone, a driver
should expect to see a protective vehicle in the
lane with a flashing arrow panel designating the
correct lane to merge to. It will also be marked
with a sign, usually stating “SLOW VEHICLES”.
53

-- 55 of 102 --

54
Typical Mobile Work Zone Setup
Authorized Safety Inspection Station Sign
Guide Signs
These signs are square or rectangular, and are green or brown with white
lettering. They show direction and distance to various locations such as
cities, airports, and state lines, or to special areas such as national parks,
historical areas, and museums.
Service Signs
These signs are square or rectangular, and are blue
with white letters or symbols. They show the location
of various services, such as rest areas and hospitals.
Route Signs
The shape of route signs indicates the type of roadway: interstate, United
States, state, or county. When planning a trip, use a highway map to
determine your route. During the trip, follow the route signs. This will help
you so you will not get lost.
North-south routes are identified by odd numbers. East-west roads are
identified by even numbers. Interstate highways that loop around cities are
identified by three-digit even numbers. Roadways that direct traffic into a
city’s road system (called “spurs”) are identified by three-digit odd numbers.
Understanding exit numbers is easy when you know interstates traveling
west/east are numbered starting from the west and going east. This means
exit numbers start at zero and increase as you drive east. Likewise, if you
come from the east, the numbers will decrease to the west. Interstates that
travel north/south have their exits numbered beginning at the south point
and increasing north. If you enter the state from the north
and drive south, then the exit numbers decrease.
Emergency Reference Markers
Emergency reference markers are mile markers placed
along the outside shoulder to mark the edge of the roadway
and convey information to drivers about their location on
the interstate for navigation and emergency situations. The
reference markers are located every two-tenths of a mile,
so motorists will always be in sight of a sign. They tell the
direction of travel and route number.
R E S T
A R EA
I N T E R S TAT E
7 0 B U S I N E S S
	L O O P
44 	A N ORTH
M I L E
1 0
.0
54

-- 56 of 102 --

Use Seat Belts and Child Restraints
Before you drive, always fasten your seat belt(s) and make sure all your
passengers are using seat belts or child restraints. Studies have shown that
if you use seat belts, your chances of being hurt or killed in a traffic crash
are greatly reduced.
Seat belts should always be worn with the lap belt low and snug across the
hips and the shoulder belt across the chest. Shoulder belts should never
be placed under the arm or behind the back. If your vehicle has a two-part
seat belt system, be sure to wear both the lap and shoulder belt.
Seat belts should be worn even if your vehicle is equipped with air
bags While air bags are good protection against hitting the steering wheel,
dashboard, or windshield, they do not protect you if you are hit from the
side or rear, or if the vehicle rolls over. An air bag will not keep you behind
the wheel in these situations.
An unrestrained or improperly restrained occupant can be seriously injured
or killed by a deploying air bag. The National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration recommends drivers sit with at least ten inches between the
center of their breastbone and the center of the steering wheel. Children
12 and under should always ride properly restrained in a rear seat. Never
put a rear-facing infant restraint in the front seat of a vehicle with a front
passenger air bag.
If you need more information about child seat safety, contact: Department
of Transportation, Highway Safety Division, website: modot org/ phone:
(800) 800-BELT.
Seat Belts — It’s The Law
Missouri law requires the operator and front seat
occupants of all passenger vehicles to wear a
properly adjusted and fastened seat belt. However,
ALL passengers accompanying an intermediate driver
license holder must be properly restrained.
Child Passenger Restraint Law
The law requires children of certain ages, weights and
heights to be restrained by a child passenger restraint
system, booster seat or safety belt when transported in
any motor vehicle other than a public carrier for hire or school bus.
Age, Weight and Height Classifications
• Less Than Four Years Old — Children less than four years old,
regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint
system appropriate for that child.
• Less Than 40 Pounds — Children weighing less than 40 pounds,
regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system
appropriate for that child.
55
Chapter 8 - Safe Driving Tips For Everyday Driving

-- 57 of 102 --

56
• 	Less Than Eight Years Old or 80 Pounds or Under 4’9” — Children
at least four years of age but less than eight years of age, who also
weigh at least 40 pounds but less than 80 pounds, and are also less
than 4’9” tall shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
• Children At Least Eight Years Old, Greater Than 80 Pounds or
Taller Than 4’9” — Children at least eight years old, at least 80 pounds
or children more than 4’9” tall shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
For more information on the Booster Seat Law refer to the Department of
Transportation website: https://www modot org/child-safety-seats.
Defensive Driving
To avoid making mistakes, or being in a crash because of someone else’s
mistake, you must drive defensively. As a defensive driver you should:
• Keep your eyes moving. Notice what is happening ahead of you and on
the sides of the road, and check behind you through your mirrors every
few seconds. Pay special attention to oncoming vehicles. Many head-on
collisions occur by distracted drivers crossing the center line.
• Expect other drivers to make mistakes, and think what you would do if a
mistake does happen. For example, do not assume that a vehicle
coming to a stop sign is going to stop. Be ready to react if it does not
stop. Never cause a crash on purpose, even if a pedestrian or another
vehicle fails to give you the right-of-way.
• Do not rely on traffic signals or signs to keep others from crossing in
front of you. Some drivers may not obey traffic signals or signs. At an
intersection, look to the left and right, even if other traffic has a red light
or a stop sign.
Proper Posture While Driving
The way you sit and hold the steering wheel affects your driving. Good
posture can help you stay alert and in full control of your vehicle.
• Sit with your back straight, upright, and relaxed against the seat.
• Move your seat close enough so you can easily reach the pedals but
far enough away that your elbows are in front of you when you hold the
steering wheel.
• Keep both feet within reach of the floor controls.
• Keep both hands on the steering wheel.
Steering
Use a proper grip. Place your left hand between the seven & nine o’clock
positions and your right hand between the three & five o’clock positions on
the steering wheel. This position is comfortable and allows you to make
most turns without taking your hands off the wheel.
Look well down the road, not just at the road in front of your vehicle. Look for
traffic situations where you will need to steer or slow before you get to them.
When turning corners, turn the steering wheel using the hand-over-hand
technique. Do not turn the wheel with just the palm of one hand, because
you could lose control. When you complete a turn, straighten out the
steering wheel by hand.

-- 58 of 102 --

57
Steering Wheel Locking Device — Never turn your vehicle’s ignition key
to the “lock” position while your vehicle is still in motion. This will cause the
steering wheel to lock if you try to turn the steering wheel, and you will lose
control of your vehicle.
Following Other Vehicles
Be sure to keep a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front
of you. You need a safe distance to stop or turn to avoid a crash. Rear-end
crashes are very common. They are caused by drivers who follow too closely
and cannot stop in time when the vehicle ahead suddenly stops.
Three Second Rule
A good way to measure your safe following distance is to use the “three
second rule.” Choose an object near the road ahead, like a sign or
telephone pole. As the vehicle ahead of you passes it, count slowly, “one-
thousand one, one-thousand two, one-thousand three.” If you reach the
object before you finish counting, you are too close to the vehicle ahead.
Space Behind
It is not always easy to maintain a safe distance behind your vehicle.
However, you can help keep the driver at a safe distance by keeping a
steady speed, and signaling in advance when you slow down. Follow these
safety tips:
• Try to find a safe place out of traffic to stop and pick up or let off passengers.
• If you want to parallel park and there is traffic coming behind you, put on
your turn signal, pull next to the space, and allow vehicles to pass before
you park.
• When you have to drive so slowly that you slow down other vehicles, pull
to the side of the road when it is safe to do so, and let them pass. There
are turnout areas on some two-lane roads you could use. Other two-lane
roads sometimes have passing lanes.
• If you are followed too closely or “tailgated” by another driver, and there
is a right lane, move over to the right. If there is no right lane, wait until
the road ahead is clear and then reduce speed slowly. This will encourage
the tailgater to drive around you. Never slow down quickly to discourage
a tailgater. This will only increase your risk of being hit from behind.
Space To The Side
You need space on both sides of your vehicle to have room to turn or
change lanes.
• Avoid driving next to other vehicles on multi-lane roads. Someone may
crowd your lane or try to change lanes and pull into you. Move ahead or
drop behind the other vehicle.
• Keep as much space as you can between yourself and oncoming
vehicles. On a two-lane road, this means not crowding the center line. In
general, it is safest to drive in the center of your lane.
• Make room for vehicles entering on a multi-lane roadway. If there is not
a vehicle in the lane next to you, move over a lane.
• Keep extra space between your vehicle and parked vehicles. Someone
could step out from a parked vehicle, from between vehicles, or a parked
vehicle could pull out.
57

-- 59 of 102 --

• Give extra space to pedestrians or bicyclists, especially children. They
may move into your path quickly and without warning. Wait until it is safe
to pass.
• When possible, take potential hazards one at a time. For example, if you
are overtaking a bicycle and an oncoming vehicle is approaching, slow
down and let the vehicle pass first so you can give extra room to the
bicycle.
Stopping Distance
Your stopping distance equals your reaction distance plus your braking
distance. If you are driving fast, are very tired, or if your vehicle has bad
brakes, you will need more space to stop your vehicle.
The following distance equals your reaction distance plus your vehicle’s
braking distance at different speeds. The reaction distance is the distance
you travel after you see a danger and before you apply your brakes. In the
chart shown below, the reaction distance is for 1.5 seconds. You have to
be alert to react within one and one-half seconds.
The braking distance is the distance you travel after you apply your brakes
and before your vehicle comes to a stop. In the chart shown below, the
braking distance is for a vehicle with good brakes and tires, in good
weather and on a good road.
Average Stopping Distance of Cars on Dry Level Pavement
Letting Others Know What You Are Doing
Generally, other drivers expect you to keep doing what you are doing. You
must warn them when you are going to change direction or slow down.
This will give them time to react to what you do.
Signal When You Change Direction
You should use your turn signals before you change lanes, turn right or left,
merge into traffic, or park.
• Get into the habit of signaling every time you change direction. Signal
even when you do not see anyone else around. It is easy to miss
someone who needs to know what you are doing.
• Signal as early as you can. Try to signal at least 100 feet before you
make your move. If there are other streets, driveways, or entrances
between you and where you want to turn, wait until you have passed
them to signal.
• If another vehicle is about to enter the street between you and where
you plan to turn, wait until you have passed it to signal your turn.
58

-- 60 of 102 --

59
• After you have made a turn or lane change, make sure your turn signal
is off. After small turns, the signal may not turn off by itself. Turn it off if
it has not clicked off by itself. If you do not, other drivers might think you
plan to turn again.
Using Your Horn
Do not use your horn unless you have to. Needless use of your horn may
distract other drivers and cause a traffic crash. There is only one reason
to use your horn: to warn other drivers. Your horn should not be used as a
display of anger or frustration.
“Slow Poke” Driving
It is against the law for you to drive slower than the posted minimum speed
under normal driving conditions. You may drive more slowly than the minimum
speed if you are driving in bad weather, heavy traffic, or on a bad road.
If there is no posted minimum speed, it is still against the law for you to
drive so slowly that you block traffic. If you have to drive more slowly, and
vehicles line up behind you, pull over and let them pass. Many crashes are
caused by slow drivers who block other traffic. Remember, slower is not
always safer.
Carbon Monoxide
Beware of carbon monoxide poisoning. Vehicle motors give off carbon
monoxide which is a deadly gas. To avoid carbon monoxide poisoning:
• Do not leave the motor running in a garage.
• Do not leave the motor running and windows closed when you park your
vehicle.
• Do not use the heater or air conditioner in a parked vehicle with the
windows closed.
• Do not leave the vents open when following closely behind another vehicle.
• Do not drive with a defective muffler or exhaust system.
Tips For Avoiding a Deer-Vehicle Crash
You can reduce your odds of being involved in a deer-vehicle crash by
applying these precautionary measures:
• Be especially alert and use caution when traveling through areas marked
with deer crossing signs.
• Deer seldom travel alone. Chances are if you see one deer crossing a road
or notice a struck deer on the side of the road, there are others nearby.
• Be especially cautious in areas around fields, streams, and gardens where
deer tend to congregate.
• Most deer-related crashes occur in January, May, and October through
December.
• Highest-risk periods are from sunset to midnight and the hours shortly
before and after sunrise.
• After dark, use high beams when there is no opposing traffic. High
beams will illuminate the eyes of deer on or near a roadway and provide
greater motorist reaction time.
• To reduce the likelihood of serious injury in a crash, be sure all vehicle
occupants wear seat belts and children are properly restrained in child
safety seats.

-- 61 of 102 --

60
• If you see that a crash is unavoidable, do not swerve. Swerving off the
road or into the path of an oncoming car can increase the risk of injury.
• Make sure there is no traffic behind you before slowing suddenly. Too
much brake pressure can cause the front end of the vehicle to drop
down, striking the deer in the legs and allowing the body to come into
the passenger compartment of the vehicle.
• If you are involved in a crash:
○ Report the crash to a local law enforcement agency;
○ Obtain a police report (if required) to file a claim for coverage with
your insurance company; and
○ Contact a local Missouri Department of Conservation agent to report
where the crash occurred. This can help to identify frequent deer
crossing areas.
Tire Pressure
Prior to entering the vehicle, check the tire pressure using the recommended
PSI (pounds per square inch) located in the vehicle owner’s manual or the
driver’s side door jam of the vehicle. Use a tire pressure gauge to check
your psi. If your psi is above the number listed in the owner’s manual or on
your door jam, let air out until it matches. If below, add air (or have a tire
professional help you) until it reaches the proper number.
You may measure tread depth using the penny test. Once every month, or
before you embark upon a long road trip, check your tires for wear and
damage problems. An easy way to check for wear is by using the penny test.
• 	Take a penny and hold Abraham Lincoln’s body between your thumb
and forefinger.
• 	Select a point on your tire where the tread appears to be lowest and
place Lincoln’s head into one of the grooves.
• 	If any part of Lincoln’s head is covered by the tread, you’re driving with
the safe amount of tread. If your tread gets below that, (approximately
2/32 of an inch) your car’s ability to grip the road in adverse conditions
is greatly reduced.
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law Enforcement
Law enforcement officers conduct traffic stops because they observe a
traffic violation or are conducting a police investigation. Being stopped by a
law enforcement officer can be a stressful experience but knowing what to
do during the stop will help ensure your safety, the safety of other motorists,
and the safety of the officer.
When you see emergency lights behind you, stay calm, activate your turn
signal, and pull off or to the side of the roadway as soon and safely as
possible. Turn off the ignition and radio, and stay in your vehicle unless
directed by the officer to exit. Keep your hands on the steering wheel so
they are easily observable. Ask your passengers to remain calm and to
stay in the vehicle while keeping their hands in plain view as well. Give the
officer your full attention. Cell phones and mobile devices should not be
used by you or any of your passengers. Do not make sudden moves or
search for your driver’s license or vehicle documents – wait for the officer
to give you instructions. If you have a weapon(s) in the vehicle, inform the
officer upon first contact.

-- 62 of 102 --

61
If it’s nighttime, the officer may direct a spotlight at your vehicle once
stopped. To assist with visibility, turn on your interior lights as soon as
you stop to help the officer see inside your vehicle.
The officer will usually explain why they stopped you and may ask you
questions about your trip. If the officer isn’t in uniform they will show you
their law enforcement credentials or you may ask to see them. Follow all
instructions the officer gives you or your passengers. The officer may ask
to see your driver license, proof of insurance, and vehicle registration. If the
documents are out of your reach, tell the officer where they are before you
reach for them. If you have questions, politely ask for clarification. If the
officer asks you to exit the vehicle, stay safely away from traffic and keep
your hands in plain view.
When the officer completes their interaction with you they may issue a
warning or a traffic ticket which may include a fine. The officer will typically
explain whatever action is being taken. If you have questions, respectfully
ask the officer to clarify. If you disagree with the officer’s decision to issue a
traffic ticket, don’t prolong the contact by arguing with the officer. If you wish
to contest the ticket, you will have the opportunity to explain your point of
view of what happened in court. Your acceptance and signature on a traffic
ticket is not an admission of guilt; however, the refusal to sign a traffic ticket
may result in your arrest. If you believe the officer acted inappropriately,
document the officer’s behavior and report it to the officer’s agency in a
timely manner. The name of the officer and law enforcement agency will be
on the ticket or you may ask the officer to provide this information.
The enforcement of traffic laws is an effective tool in changing unsafe
driving behavior and reducing crashes. If you receive a warning or a ticket
for a traffic violation, its purpose is to deter illegal and/or unsafe behavior.
Good communication from all involved parties can make a traffic stop a safe
experience for all parties involved.
If you are the subject of a traffic stop, you have legal rights created by the
Constitution and the law. These include the right to be free from unreasonable
search and seizure, the right to be free from being forced to incriminate
yourself, which is commonly referred to as the right to remain silent, and the
right to an attorney. Please consult an attorney licensed to practice in the
State of Missouri if you have questions about these and other rights.
61

-- 63 of 102 --

62
Night Driving
Driving at night is more difficult than driving during the day. Headlights do not let
you see as far ahead as you can in daylight, and limit your view of the sides
of the road. The glare of oncoming headlights makes seeing the road more
difficult.
For driving at night, you should:
• 	Make sure your windows are clean.
• 	Turn your headlights on from ½ hour after sunset until ½ hour before sunrise.
• 	Make sure your headlights are clean and working well. Have them
checked from time to time for correct aim.
• 	Use your high beams when there are no oncoming vehicles.
• 	Do not overdrive your headlights. Your headlights only let you see about
350 feet ahead. Be sure you are driving slow enough to stop or turn if
needed.
• 	Use your low beams when you come within 500 feet (about one block)
of an oncoming vehicle. Also use your low beams when following
another vehicle within 300 feet.
• 	Slow down when nearing a curve if you are driving the maximum posted
speed limit.
• 	Use the edgeline as a guide. If there is no edgeline, use the center line
to guide you.
• 	Stay awake and alert. Do not drive if you feel tired.
• 	Watch carefully for highway signs, as they are harder to see at night.
• 	Watch carefully for people and vehicles stopped on the side of the road.
Headlight Use
You must use your headlights any time weather conditions require the use
of your windshield wipers.
Winter Driving
In winter, clean all snow and ice off your windows, headlights, and taillights.
Be sure your windshield wipers and defroster are working. No matter how
far you are going to drive, never start driving until all snow and ice is off
your windows.
Your vehicle should have tires that are rated for driving in snow. If you do
not have tires that are rated for driving in snow, you should have chains
ready to put on your tires during bad weather. But even if you have “snow”
tires or chains, you cannot drive safely on snow or ice at normal speeds. If
there is snow or ice on the road, slow down and do not use your vehicle’s
cruise control system. When starting on snow or ice, start slowly and
smoothly. If your tires start to spin, try clearing a path by driving backwards
and forwards a few times. If that does not help, spread some abrasive
material like salt, sand, or cat box litter around your wheels. NEVER let
anyone stand in line with your wheels. Your wheels may throw up gravel or
ice and cause an injury.
Chapter 9 - Safe Driving Tips for Special Driving Conditions

-- 64 of 102 --

Once you have started, try to get the feel of the road. Gently brake while
driving to see how slippery the road is and then adjust your speed for the
road conditions.
It will take longer to stop your vehicle when driving on snow or ice. So be
sure to leave a safe distance, about eight to ten seconds, between your
vehicle and any vehicle ahead of you.
When you want to slow down or stop, apply the brakes gently and
smoothly. Never slam on your brakes — this may cause you to skid. On
very slippery surfaces, pump the brakes by gently pushing down and letting
up on them several times. If your vehicle is equipped with an anti-lock
brake system, refer to your owner’s manual for proper braking techniques
in special situations.
Remember that bridges and overpasses will freeze and become slippery
before other parts of the road, and be aware that even on cleared roads a
few ice patches may still exist.
If you have a four-wheel drive vehicle, do not use the four-wheel drive on
ice. Four-wheel drive vehicles can easily overturn on ice. If you hit an icy
patch in four-wheel drive, take your foot off the accelerator.
Remember, Ice and Snow. . . . Take it SLOW!
Wet Pavement
When it starts to rain, water mixes with the dust and oil on the road to
form a slick, greasy film. Fallen leaves can also become slippery. The wet
pavement may make it harder for you to stay on the road on curves. It will
also take longer to stop your vehicle. So be sure to slow your speed and
leave a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front of you.
Do not use your vehicle’s cruise control system on wet pavement. The
cruise control system will continue to provide power to the tires if you lose
traction and may cause you to lose control.
Hydroplaning
On wet pavement, your tires may ride on the water rather than the
pavement. This is known as “hydroplaning” and it refers to loss of traction
and control. Hydroplaning can happen at any speed over 35 mph. In a
severe rainstorm, the tires can lose all contact with the road at 55 mph.
If you think your tires are hydroplaning, take your foot off the accelerator
and slow down. Do not hit the brakes as this may cause you to skid.
To avoid hydroplaning:
• Have good tires with deep treads on your vehicle.
• Keep tires properly inflated.
• Slow down during rainstorms or when the pavement is wet.
• Do not use your vehicle’s cruise control system.
Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS)
Four-wheel ABS is a safe, effective braking system when used properly.
It offers an important safety advantage by preventing the wheels from
locking during emergency braking situations. If your car is equipped with
ABS, you should be aware that under hard braking you may feel a pulsing
63

-- 65 of 102 --

64
in the brake pedal. Do keep your foot on the brake. Maintain a firm and
continuous pressure on the brake while steering to enable the four-wheel
ABS to work properly.
Remember, if your vehicle is equipped with anti-lock brakes don’t:
• Pump your brakes,
• Forget to steer,
• Be alarmed by mechanical noises and/or slight pedal pulsations.
These conditions are normal and let you know the ABS is working.
Skidding
Handling a skid is the same for front-wheel and rear-wheel drive vehicles.
Take your foot off the accelerator, but DO NOT hit the brakes.
• 	Gently turn your steering wheel in the direction that your rear wheels are
sliding.
• 	Be careful not to brake or turn sharply. Hitting the brakes or jerking the
steering wheel will only make the skid worse.
Steer Into The Skid
1 Before 	2 Rear 	3 Turn 	4 Vehicle
Skid 	Wheels 	Front 	Straight
Slide 	Wheels 	Again
To Right 	To Right
Fog
It is very dangerous to drive in fog. If you must drive in fog, you should:
• 	Reduce your speed.
• 	Be alert and ready to stop.
• 	Keep your headlights on low beam. In fog, you will see less if your lights
are on high beam.
• 	If the fog becomes so thick you cannot see, pull off the road and stop.
Leave your lights and emergency flashers on.
Handling Vehicle Emergencies
The most important rule in any emergency is do not panic. If you stay
calm, you will remember what you should do. If you have power steering or
a locking steering wheel, never turn off the ignition key until you have come
to a full stop.
Brake Failure: If your brake pedal suddenly sinks to the floor:
• Pump the brake pedal fast and hard several times. If that does not work...
• Use your emergency or parking brake, but use it gradually.
• Shift to a low gear and look for a place to slow to a stop.
• Make sure your vehicle is off the road.
• After the vehicle has stopped, call for help. Do not try to drive to a garage.

-- 66 of 102 --

65
Tire Blowout: If you have a tire blowout, you may hear a loud “bang” then
“thump, thump, thump.” The steering wheel may jerk, and you may lose
control of your vehicle.
• Hold the steering wheel tightly.
• Take your foot off the accelerator, but do not hit the brakes.
• Let your vehicle slow to a stop completely off the road.
• Apply the brakes when the vehicle is almost stopped.
• Turn on your emergency flashers.
• Change the tire only if you can do so without placing yourself in danger.
Running Off the Pavement: If your wheels run off the paved edge of the
road, the wheels may pull to the right:
• Hold the steering wheel tightly.
• Take your foot off the accelerator, but do not hit the brakes. Only apply
gentle brake pressure, if necessary.
• When the vehicle has slowed and you have control of your vehicle, turn
back onto the pavement if the lane is free of traffic.
Steering Failure: If your vehicle does not turn when you turn the wheel:
• Take your foot off the accelerator.
• Let your vehicle slow down by itself. Do not hit the brakes until your
vehicle has almost stopped, or unless you have to.
• Turn on your emergency flashers.
Headlight Failure: If your vehicle’s headlights go out:
• Try the dimmer switch or headlight switch, that might turn them on again.
If that does not work...
• Put the parking lights, emergency flashers, or turn signals on.
• Pull off the road, but leave the emergency flashers on.
Stuck Accelerator: If your accelerator becomes stuck, you should:
• Shift to neutral;
• Apply the brakes;
• Keep your eyes on the road;
• Look for a way out;
• Warn other drivers by honking and flashing your emergency lights;
• Try to drive the car safely off the road; and
• When you no longer need to change direction and have stopped, turn
off the ignition. (Turning off the key locks the steering wheel of many
vehicles.)
Blocked Vision: If your hood suddenly flies open, your windshield wipers
fail, or something else blocks your vision:
• Roll down the window so you can look around whatever is blocking your
view.
• Turn on your emergency flashers.
• Pull your vehicle off the road.
Vehicle Approaching Head-On In Your Lane:
• Slow down.
• Pull over to the right and sound your horn.
• DO NOT swing over into the left lane. The other driver may pull back
over into that lane, too.

-- 67 of 102 --

66
Stalling On Railroad Tracks:
If a train is approaching:
• Unfasten your seat belt, get out of your vehicle, and off the tracks.
• Run in the direction the train is coming from. (If you run in the direction
the train is heading, you may be hit with debris when the train hits your
vehicle.)
If there is no train in sight:
• 	Roll down your windows and listen for the train.
• 	Try to start the engine. If that fails...
• 	Put your vehicle in neutral and push it off the tracks.
12 and 15 Passenger Van Safety:
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has determined that 12-
and 15-passenger vans are inherently unstable when loaded to the level for
which they are designed, carrying more than ten passengers. The NTSB
recommends that all drivers of 12- and 15-passenger vans obtain specific
training on the handling and operation of these types of vehicles. For more
information regarding 12- and 15-passenger van safety, you may visit the
NTSB’s website at http://www ntsb gov/Pages/default aspx.

-- 68 of 102 --

67
Driving a motor vehicle is a privilege. It takes skill and common sense.
Alcohol, drugs, or fatigue will cause your driving to suffer, and it is your
responsibility to know when you are not in shape to drive. Driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, even medicine, or driving when you’re tired
can have deadly consequences — for you, your passengers, and other
motorists.
Drinking and driving is not worth the risk to your life and the lives of others.
Even a small amount of alcohol may affect your driving ability. If you are
going to drink, let someone else drive who has not been drinking.
Missouri laws are tough if you are found guilty of drinking or using drugs
while driving. You may pay a fine, lose your license, and even go to jail.
If you injure or kill someone because you were drinking or using drugs
while driving, you may:
• Spend two to seven years in jail;
• Pay a $5,000 fine; and/or
• Lose your driver license for five years.
When a police officer stops you and suspects you have been drinking, the
officer may ask you to take some tests like walking heel to toe, or standing
on one leg. These tests will help the officer decide if you should be arrested
and have a chemical test of your breath, blood, or urine. The result of this
test is known as your Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) level.
Administrative Actions
If your BAC level is .08% or more (or for minors .02% or more), the officer
will take your license away and give you a notice. This notice tells you
that your license will be suspended or revoked (and you will not be able
to legally drive) after 15 days. The notice includes a 15-day driving permit
that you can use if the officer indicates this on the notice. The notice also
allows you to request a hearing or, if eligible, request an immediate 90-day
Restricted Driving Privilege (RDP). If you are given a hearing, you may
continue to legally drive until 15 days after a decision is mailed to you.
There are two types of actions that may be taken against you for driving
when you are not fit to drive. There are administrative actions and court
convicted actions, which carry different penalties.
Chapter 10 - Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving

-- 69 of 102 --

68
The following chart shows the administrative actions that you can expect to
face if you are arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
*Ignition Interlock Device (IID) installation required for reinstatement.
Court-Convicted Actions
If you receive a ticket, and a judge finds you guilty of Driving While
Intoxicated (DWI) or Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) of .08% or more, you will
not be able to legally drive after the ticket is sent to the Department. Your
license will be suspended, revoked, or denied based on your past driving
record,and the points will be added to your record. You will be notified by
mail when you must stop driving. The chart below shows the consequences
of a court convicted action like DWI or BAC:
License
Suspension
1st Offense *2nd Offense
License
Revocation
*2nd Offense within a 5-year
period - One-year license revocation
Please see
Page 71
for
Reinstatement
Requirements
Administrative 	Driver License Suspension/ 	To Get Your
Action 	Revocation/Denial 	License Back
Driver License 	To Get Your
Crime 	Fines/Jail 	Suspension, 	License Back
Revocation or Denial
BAC
Driving/
operating a
vehicle with
.08% Blood
Alcohol
Content or
more
and/or
DWI
Driving
While
Intoxicated.
1st Offense - Spend
up to six months in jail.
Pay up to a $500 fine.
2nd Offense - Spend
up to one year in jail.
Pay up to a $1,000 fine.
3rd Offense - Spend
up to four years in jail.
Pay up to a $5,000
fine.
4th Offense - Spend
up to seven years in
jail. Pay up to a $5,000
fine.
5th Offense -
Spend between five
and 15 years in jail.
1st Offense -
90 day suspension
• You may be eligible for a
90-day or 60-day Restricted
Driving Privilege.
*2nd Offense - One-year
license revocation.
*2nd Offense Within 5
Years - Five-year license
denial.
NOTE: Only a BAC with a
conviction date of August
28, 2009 or after can be
used toward a five-year
denial.
*3rd Offense - Ten-year
license denial.
*3rd and Subsequent
Offenses - Ten-year
license denial.
Please see
Page 71
for
Reinstatement
Requirements

-- 70 of 102 --

69
Missouri’s Abuse and Lose Law
If you are younger than 21 years of age, your driver license may be
taken away for 90 days for any of the following:
• Any intoxication alcohol-related traffic offense;
• If you possess or use alcohol or drugs while driving a vehicle;
• If you alter, modify, or misrepresent a driver license; or
• If you are under 18 years of age, and possess or use alcohol, and are
charged with a second offense.
If you are 21 years of age or older, you may have your driver license
taken away for one year if you possess or use drugs while driving. To get
your license back, you must:
• Pay a $45 fee;
• Submit a form showing you completed a Substance Awareness Traffic
Offender Program (SATOP) or comparable program;
• Provide proof of insurance for two years (SR-22 filing); and
• Retake the complete driver exam.
Minor in Possession (MIP) and Other Intoxication-Related Offenses
If you are older than 15 years of age and under 21 years of age, a state
court may suspend or revoke your driver license for any of the following:
• Purchasing or attempting to purchase any intoxicating liquor;
• Possessing any intoxicating liquor (consumption constitutes possession);
• Being visibly intoxicated as defined in Section 577 001, RSMo ; or
• Having a Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) level of more than .02%.
The following chart shows the consequences a young person faces for MIP
and other intoxication-related offenses:
Driver License
Crime 	Suspension/Revocation To Get Your License Back
MIP
Minor in
Possession
1st Offense — 30-day
suspension
2nd Offense — 90-day
suspension
3rd Offense — One-
year revocation
Pay a $45 fee, and attend a
Substance Awareness Traffic
Offender Program (SATOP) or
comparable program. If your
driving privilege is revoked
for one-year, provide proof of
insurance for two years (SR-22
filing), and retake the driver exam.
Proof of Insurance
If you are facing consequences of a DWI or BAC, you will be required to
file proof of insurance with the Driver License Bureau. The most common
method of filing proof of insurance is an SR-22 insurance filing.
Proof of insurance must be kept on file with the Driver License Bureau for
two years. If you do not keep proof of insurance on file, your driver license
will be suspended for the rest of the two years, unless you file proof of
insurance and pay a $20 fee.
There is one exception to this rule: Minors with a BAC of .02% or more do
not have to file proof of insurance on a first-offense.

-- 71 of 102 --

70
More information about insurance is included in Chapter 13 of this Guide.
Refusal to Submit to a Chemical Test of Your Blood Alcohol
Content (BAC)
If a police officer stops you and you refuse to take a chemical test to determine
your BAC, your driver license will be taken away for one year. Your driver
license may be reinstated if you submit the requirements listed below.
Reinstatement Requirements for Intoxication-Related Offenses
Your license will be reinstated if you:
• 	Pay a $45 fee;
• 	Submit a form showing you completed a Substance Awareness Traffic
Offender Program (SATOP) or comparable program;
• 	Provide proof of insurance for two years (SR-22 filing); and
• 	Have an ignition interlock device (IID) installed on any vehicle you
operate for at least six months from date of reinstatement if you have
more than one intoxication-related law enforcement contact.
Ignition Interlock
An ignition interlock device (IID) is a mechanical unit that is connected to
the vehicle’s ignition, horn, and headlights, and measures the concentration
of alcohol in a person’s breath. The IID requires vehicle operators to
provide a breath sample before starting the vehicle and periodically during
the operation of the vehicle.
If you have more than one intoxication-related contact showing on your
driver record, you must have an IID installed on any vehicle you operate
before your driving privilege can be reinstated. The IID must be maintained
for a minimum of six months from your reinstatement date without any
violations in the last three months. You must pay for having the device
installed and for having it serviced every month. If you fail to maintain the
IID, your driving privilege will be re-suspended. You will be required to have
the device serviced/installed, send proof to the Driver License Bureau, and
pay a $20 reinstatement fee before having your driving privilege reinstated.
In addition to driver licensing requirements, a court may impose other
requirements such as: IID use for the first DWI conviction; or use of a
device for longer than six months.
If you receive a ticket for failing to have an IID installed as required by law
and you are convicted in court, your driving privilege will be revoked for one
year. A second-offense requires your driving privilege to be taken away for
five years.
To locate a list of approved ignition interlock devices and installers, visit
https://www modot org/ignition-interlock or contact the Missouri
Department of Transportation at 800-801-3588.

-- 72 of 102 --

71	71
Physical and Mental Effects of Alcohol and Drugs
Alcohol and other drugs can create physical and mental changes in the body
that make it difficult to drive. Judgement, vision, reflexes, and alertness can
all be impaired by alcohol and other drug use. It is dangerous and illegal to
drive under the influence of alcohol or other drugs. In Missouri, a person can
be charged with DWI (Driving While Intoxicated) for driving while impaired by
alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription medication, over-the-counter medication, or
any combination of these. The use of any drug (the law does not distinguish
between prescription, over-the-counter, or illegal drugs) which impairs your
ability to drive safely is illegal. The penalties for DWI in Missouri are exactly
the same regardless of whether the impairment is from drugs or alcohol. The
punishment for those convicted of DWI is up to six months in prison and a fine
of up to $500 and the loss of driving privileges. Drunk and/or drugged driving
puts the driver, passengers, and others who share the road at risk. Please
keep yourself and others safe by not driving while impaired.
Alcohol
Alcohol can significantly impair the brain and body so that it is unsafe to drive.
Alcohol slows reflexes and decreases reaction time, making it unsafe for
drivers to quickly react to a variety of situations. Alcohol can affect vision,
including slowing down eye muscle function, altering visual perception, and
impairing night vision. Alcohol can cause drowsiness, decreased
concentration, and decreased attention. Alcohol can also impair coordination,
reduce comprehension, and limit the ability to make rational decisions. It is
illegal to drive with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08% or more (0.04% for
commercial vehicle drivers and 0.02% if under 21). It is illegal to possess or
purchase alcohol if you are under the age of 21. Remember: Even one drink is
likely to affect your ability to drive safely and in many cases, two drinks could
place you over the legal blood alcohol limit.
Prescription and Over-the-Counter Medications
Remember that all medications, both prescription and over-the-counter, are
potentially dangerous and can impair driving, even when taken as directed.
Check with your physician or pharmacist and read the warning label if you
are not sure whether taking the medication will affect your driving. It is
your responsibility to know the effects of the medications you take. Over-
the-counter medicines that you take for colds and allergies can make you
drowsy and affect your driving ability. Pep pills, “uppers,” and diet pills can
make a driver more alert for a short time. Later, however, they can cause
a person to be nervous, dizzy, and not able to concentrate. They can also
affect vision. Any drug that “may cause drowsiness or dizziness” is one you
should not take before driving. Do not mix medications, unless directed by
your physician. Do not take medications prescribed for someone else. This
is dangerous and illegal. Use medications only as prescribed. Do not mix
alcohol with your medications (prescribed or over the counter). Medicines
taken together or used with alcohol can be dangerous. Many drugs have
unexpected side effects when taken with alcohol. Make sure you read the
label and know the effects of any drug you use.

-- 73 of 102 --

72
Marijuana
Marijuana is the second most cited drug in car crashes, after alcohol. Even
though medical marijuana was approved by Missouri voters effective in 2020, it
is never legal or safe to drive while under the influence of marijuana.
Marijuana can impair cognitive function, impair judgment of time and distance,
and decrease coordination. Research studies have shown negative effects
of marijuana on drivers, including an increase in lane weaving, poor reaction
time, and altered attention to the road. Use of alcohol with marijuana made
drivers even more impaired, causing even more lane weaving.
Substance Use Disorder
Substance use disorders occur when the recurrent use of alcohol and/or
drugs causes clinically and functionally significant impairment, such as health
problems, disability, and failure to meet major responsibilities at work, school,
or home. Substance use disorders put people at greater risk for injuring them-
selves or others in a motor-vehicle crash. If you feel you have a substance use
disorder, there is help available. Currently, many Americans are being treated
and have been treated successfully for substance use disorders. Locate a
treatment provider near you by calling the SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration) National Helpline at 1-800-662-HELP
(4357). This is a free and confidential helpline available 24 hours/day, 365
days per year.
One of the greatest predictors of someone developing an addiction is early
use. If someone experiments with harmful substances or illicitly obtained
medications before their brain is fully developed, they are more vulnerable to
the negative effects. A young person’s under-developed brain can become
damaged quicker and more severely than an adult brain using the same
substances. Therefore, a young person is more susceptible to developing a
substance use disorder.

-- 74 of 102 --

73	73
Driving is a privilege, not a right. You can lose your driving privilege if you
disobey the traffic laws. When you are convicted of a traffic violation, while
your vehicle was in motion, the Department receives notice and adds points
to your driving record. This isn’t like a football or basketball game - you
don’t want these points. You can lose your driving privilege when you
accumulate too many points.
The number of points you receive depends on the conviction. For example,
you may receive two or three points if you are convicted of speeding
(depending on if the court was municipal, county, or state level). By
contrast, you may receive 12 points and the revocation of your driving
privilege if you are convicted of leaving the scene of a traffic crash.
The following are examples of some state law violations and the point
values associated with them:
Violation 	Point Value
Speeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	3 points
Careless & Imprudent Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	4 points
Knowingly Allowing an Unlicensed Driver
to Operate a Vehicle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	4 points
A Felony Involving a Motor Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 points
Obtaining a Driver License by
Misrepresentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 points
Operating a Vehicle with a Suspended
or Revoked Driver License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 points
Racking Up Points: The Consequences
If you accumulate a total of 4 points in 12 months, the Department will send
you a point accumulation advisory.
If you accumulate a total of 8 or more points in 18 months, your driving
privilege will be suspended. Below are the consequences for accumulating
8 points in 18 months:
• 1st suspension — 30 days
• 2nd suspension — 60 days
• 3rd (or subsequent) suspension — 90 days
Your driving privilege will be revoked for one year if you accumulate:
• 12 or more points in 12 months
• 18 or more points in 24 months
• 24 or more points in 36 months
Depending on whether your suspension or revocation was related to
alcohol, there are different reinstatement requirements.
For a non-alcohol related point suspension or revocation, you will need to:
• 	Submit proof of insurance (SR-22); and
• 	Pay a $20 reinstatement fee.
For an intoxication-related point suspension or revocation, you will need to
submit the reinstatement requirements on Page 71.
Chapter 11 - The Point System

-- 75 of 102 --

74	74
Details about submitting proof of insurance (SR-22) can be found in
Chapter 13, Mandatory Insurance.
How Points Come Off Your Driving Record
When your driving privilege is reinstated, the Department reduces your
total points to four. Every year you drive without getting new points on your
record, the points will be reduced.
• After one year - Remaining points will be reduced by one-third
• After two years - Remaining points will be reduced by one-half
• After three years - Points reduced to zero
Although your points may be reduced to zero, certain convictions must
remain listed permanently on your driving record.
Other Consequences
Driving While Your License is Suspended or Revoked
If you drive while your license is suspended, your driving privilege may be
revoked for one year after you are convicted. If you continue to drive while
your license is revoked, you may be convicted of a felony and have your
license revoked again for one year.
Failure to Appear in Court for Traffic Violations (FACT)
When you fail to appear in court for a traffic violation, the court will notify
you of your failure to comply. The court will give you 30 days to pay the
fines before the court notifies the Driver License Bureau (DLB). If you do
not comply within 30 days, the court will notify the DLB of your failure to
comply, and your driving privilege will be suspended immediately.
If this happens to you, your driving privilege will be suspended until the
Bureau receives:
• Proof that the ticket is paid; and
• A $20 reinstatement fee.
If your license is suspended for FACT, you may get your driving privilege
reinstated in one of two ways.
• Mail the reinstatement requirements to the Driver License Bureau, P.O.
Box 3950, Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-3950.
• Bring the reinstatement requirements to the Driver License Bureau
Central Office in the Harry S Truman State Office Building at 301 West
High Street, Jefferson City, Missouri, in Room 470. Office hours are 7:30
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays).

-- 76 of 102 --

75
Chapter 12 - Vehicle Titling and Registration
Titling Your Vehicle
Whether you are a Missouri resident buying a new vehicle, or a new resident
who recently moved to Missouri, you have 30 days to visit your local license
office and take care of your legal responsibilities to title your vehicle.
A title is proof that you own your vehicle. When you buy a vehicle, you
must apply for a title within 30 days. If you do not apply within 30 days, you
will have to pay a penalty fee.
You may apply for a title at any license office. The title will cost $8.50, and
you will be required to pay a $9.00 processing fee. You will have to pay all
state and local sales taxes due. For information on the amount of sales tax
you will have to pay, contact any license office, call (573) 526-3669, or visit
our website at http://dor mo gov/ and enter “sales tax calculator” into the
search box.
When you apply for a title, you will receive a receipt. You will receive your
title in the mail from the Department.
A title is a very important personal document. Do NOT keep your title in
your vehicle.
What You Need To Get A Title
The requirements are different for new and used vehicles and for vehicles
bought in Missouri and outside Missouri. Following is a description of the
requirements for these situations.
Vehicles Bought In Missouri
• New Vehicle Bought in Missouri — The dealer will give you a title
application and an assigned Manufacturer’s Statement of Origin (MSO).
The MSO indicates the vehicle is new and has never been registered.
You (the purchaser) and the dealer must complete the odometer
disclosure portion on the back of the MSO.
• 	Used Vehicle Bought in Missouri — You must receive a properly
assigned title (see below for an explanation) from the seller that proves
you have bought the vehicle. If you bought the used vehicle from a
dealer, you should also receive a completed title application. A proper
odometer disclosure on the back of the title is required on vehicles
that are model year 2011 and newer until the vehicle reaches the age of
twenty years old. If the title assigned to you is an out-of-state title, you
must get an identification number and odometer (ID/OD) verification
form completed by a licensed inspection station.
Vehicles Bought Out-Of-State
• 	New Vehicle Bought Out-of-State — You must receive the dealer’s
invoice or a bill of sale and assigned MSO from the out-of-state dealer.
You (the purchaser) and the dealer must complete the odometer
disclosure portion on the back of the MSO.

-- 77 of 102 --

76
• Used Vehicle Bought Out-of-State — You must receive either a properly
assigned title (see below for an explanation) from the seller or a reassigned
title from the dealer. If the state does not require a title, you must get a
bill of sale and the vehicle’s last certificate of registration in that state. A
proper odometer disclosure is required on vehicles model year 2011
and newer until the vehicle reaches the age of twenty years old. If the
title assigned to you is an out-of-state title, you must get an identification
number and odometer (ID/OD) verification form completed by a licensed
inspection station.
Properly Assigned Titles
A properly assigned title has the following information completed in the
assignment area:
• Buyer’s name and address;
• Odometer reading, if applicable;
• Sale price of vehicle;
• Date of the sale;
• Name of any lienholder, if applicable;
• Signature and printed name of all sellers; and
• Buyer’s printed name and signature, if applicable.
Salvage Vehicles
For information on titling a vehicle bought for salvage, dismantling, or
rebuilding, call (573) 526-3669, or write to:
Missouri Department of Revenue
Motor Vehicle Bureau
301 West High Street, Room 370
P.O. Box 100
Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-0100
Odometer Readings
When you buy or sell a vehicle, the seller must write the mileage reading
on the title assignment if the model year is 2011 or newer and the vehicle is
less than 20 years old. If the vehicle is new, the odometer reading must be
on the MSO. Both the buyer and the
seller must print and sign their names verifying the mileage. In some
instances, a separate odometer statement may be required.
Registering Your Vehicle
If you are a Missouri resident, you are required to register your vehicle in
Missouri. If you are a new Missouri resident, you must register your vehicle
within 30 days of becoming a Missouri resident.
If you are a new Missouri resident, you must surrender your out-of-state title
and apply for a Missouri title. If a financial institution has possession of
your title, and is unable to release the out-of-state title to you, you must
provide a statement from the financial institution indicating the title will not
be surrendered to the vehicle owner and one of the following three options,
a copy of the front and back of the out-of-state title indicating the applicant(s)
name as the owner and the financial institution as the lienholder; copy of the
out-of-state title receipt indicating the applicant(s) name as the owner and
the lienholder’s name as the lienholder when the out-of-state title is from

-- 78 of 102 --

77
an electronic titling state; or a statement from the financial institution, on
letterhead, declaring the out-of-state title is held by an electronic titling state.
When you register your vehicle in Missouri, you will receive Missouri
license plates and a year tab located on the plate.
You may register your vehicle at any license office. If you are registering
a passenger vehicle, your registration fee will be based on your vehicle’s
taxable horsepower. If you are registering a commercial vehicle, your
registration fee will be based on its zone and gross weight. An additional
processing fee will apply.
You may be eligible to obtain a two-year registration for your vehicle.
During an even-numbered year (like 2018) you may register for two years if
your vehicle has an even-numbered model year. Likewise, during an odd-
numbered year (like 2019) you may register for two years if your vehicle
has an odd-numbered model year. Otherwise, only a one-year registration
is available.
What You Need to Register Your Vehicle
About two months before your vehicle registration expires, you should
receive a renewal notice in the mail. If you do not receive the notice, you
are still required by law to renew your license plates before they expire.
To ensure you receive a renewal notice, remember to update your address
if you move. You can e-mail mvbmail@dor mo gov and include your full
name, old and new address, your driver license number or last four digits of
your social security number, and your vehicle’s license plate number(s).
The renewal notice will list your requirements to renew your vehicle
registration. Make sure to read the list and bring the required documents
to the license office with you. The requirements are listed below but all of
them may not apply to you.
• 	Renewal notice from the Department, a registration receipt from the
previous year, or a copy of your title.
• 	Paid personal property tax receipt or a statement of non-assessment
from the county in which you reside (or city of St. Louis) for the period
of your previous registration. (If you had a one-year registration, show
the previous year’s receipt. If you had a two-year registration, show
receipts from the previous two years.)
• 	Current insurance identification card or other proof of financial
responsibility (refer to Chapter 13 for detailed information).
• 	Current certificate of safety and/or emissions inspection done within the
last 60 days, if applicable (refer to Chapter 14 for more information).
• 	The correct registration and processing fee.
Tip! You may also be able to renew your plates online at http://dor mo gov/
motorv/plates/. If you are eligible for this convenient option, a Personal
Identification Number (PIN) will be printed on your renewal notice.

-- 79 of 102 --

78
Other Information
Selling a Vehicle
State law requires you to report the sale of your motor vehicle or all-terrain
vehicle by completing a Notice of Sale (Form 5049) and submitting it to any
license office or to the address on the form within 30 days.
Stolen License Plates and Tabs
State law allows you to replace stolen license plates and tabs up to two
times per year at NO COST (a $9.00 processing fee is applicable) if you
sign a notarized affidavit certifying the plates or tabs were stolen.
Lost or Destroyed Title, Plates, or Tabs
If your license plate(s), tab(s), or title is lost or destroyed, you must apply
for a replacement. The charge for a replacement title is $8.50; the charge
for replacement plates is $8.50 per plate; and the charge for a set of
replacement tabs is $8.50. An additional processing fee of $9.00 will also
apply.
Personalized and Specialty License Plates
You have the option to obtain personalized or specialty license plates for
your vehicle. In addition to the normal registration fee, there may be an
additional personalized plate fee. Information regarding personalized and
specialty license plates may be found online at:
http://dor mo gov/motorv/plates/specialty php

-- 80 of 102 --

79
The Basics
State law requires all motor vehicle operators and owners to have a form of
liability insurance. Liability insurance covers the policyholder’s legal liability
resulting from injuries to other persons or damage to their property. This is
called Financial Responsibility.
Motor vehicle owners are required to show proof of insurance when
registering a vehicle or renewing their license plates. There are several
ways you can provide proof of insurance. They are listed below:
• 	A copy of your original, current insurance identification card given to you
by your insurance company;
• 	A copy of your motor vehicle liability insurance policy or insurance
binder; (a temporary policy)
• 	A paid insurance receipt showing the policy information;
• 	A certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department;
• 	An ID card issued by the Department when a surety bond, or securities
are filed with the Department; or
• 	Hand held electronic device.
Most drivers obtain liability insurance through an insurance company or
agent, but there are other forms of liability insurance:
• 	Self-insurance: To be self-insured, you must have more than 25 vehicles
and be able to show you can and will pay for damage caused by your
vehicles. A certificate of self-insurance will be issued to you by the
Department.
• 	Surety bond, Certificate of Deposit, Other Negotiable Securities: To
insure through a bond, deposit, or security, you must file the bond,
certificate, or security in the amount of $75,000 (or $150,000 if a real
estate bond) with the Department. The Department will issue you a
certificate of self-insurance as proof of insurance.
• 	Cash: A deposit of $75,000 cash may be deposited with the State
Treasurer.
A certificate of self-insurance will be issued to you by the Department.
Minimum Coverage Requirements
Liability insurance covers your legal liability when injuries or property
damage happen to others as a result of your actions. The minimum level of
coverage required by state law is shown below:
• 	$25,000 per person for bodily injury;
• 	$50,000 per crash for bodily injury; and
• 	$25,000 per crash for property damage.
The law also requires you to have uninsured motorist coverage of $25,000
for bodily injury per person and $50,000 for bodily injury per crash.
Chapter 13 - Mandatory Insurance

-- 81 of 102 --

80
Maintaining Your Insurance
When you register a vehicle with the Department, you must sign a form
stating that you have insurance and will keep insurance on your vehicle.
You must keep proof of insurance in your vehicle. If a law enforcement
officer asks you for proof and you cannot show it, you will receive a ticket.
At any time, the Department may require you to show proof of insurance.
If you are in a crash and did not show proof of insurance at the time, the
Department will require you to prove you have insurance.
Failure to Keep Insurance
Insurance is important. There are a number of consequences if you fail to
keep your insurance — not only can it cost you a lot of money if you are in
a crash, but you may lose your driver license and license plates.
If the Department learns you have not kept your insurance, you will receive
a notice of suspension in the mail. Your driver license and license plates
may be taken away or suspended for not having insurance. In order to get
your license and license plates back, there are certain requirements you
must meet.
The most common way to file proof of insurance is through an SR-22
insurance filing. Contact your insurance company or agent to file the SR-22
form. If you fail to keep insurance for three years, your driver license and/or
vehicle license plates will be suspended again.
Failure to Pay for Damages Caused in a Traffic Accident
If you are at fault in an accident and do not pay for the damages you
caused, your driver license and/or vehicle license plates will be suspended
for one year. You may be reinstated during that one-year period if you do
the following:
• Pay a $20 fee; and
• Send proof to the Department of Revenue Driver License Bureau that
you have settled the damages.
Number of
Suspensions 	What Happens to You
one suspension 	Your driver license and/or license plates will be
suspended until you:
– Pay a $20 fee.
– File proof of insurance. You are required to do this
for three years.
two suspensions 	Your driver license and/or license plates will be
(within two years 	suspended for 90 days. You must also:
of each other) 	– Pay a $200 fee.
– File proof of insurance for three years.
three (or more) 	Your driver license and/or license plates will be
suspensions 	suspended for one year. You must also:
– Pay a $400 fee.
– File proof of insurance for three years.

-- 82 of 102 --

81
Traffic Crashes
A traffic crash is when you injure yourself, injure someone else, or cause
damage to property while driving your vehicle. Driving responsibly and
defensively can reduce your chances of being in a crash, but nothing can
totally prevent it. Even if you have a crash with a parked vehicle, do not
leave. Leaving the scene of a traffic crash is a crime. If you are in a crash,
you should:
• 	STOP! Move your vehicle off the road if possible, especially if it may
cause other crashes.
• 	Help anyone who is hurt. Try to make the injured person comfortable,
but do not move him or her. Call an ambulance.
• 	Call the police.
• 	Use flares, reflectors, or flashlights to warn other traffic if the crash has
happened at night or in bad weather.
• 	Exchange the following information with everyone involved:
○ Name;
○ Address;
○ Driver license number, vehicle identification number (VIN) and license
plate number; and
○ Name of your insurance company and policy number.
• 	Stay until a law enforcement officer says you may leave the crash scene.
• 	Contact your insurance company as soon as possible, even if the crash
wasn’t your fault.
“Steer It and Clear It”
If you’re involved in a minor traffic crash, one of the first thoughts you might
have is whether or not you should move your vehicle. The answer is yes.
A state law that took effect ten years ago requires vehicles involved in
minor, non-injury crashes to move off the road. The Missouri Department
of Transportation is using the ten-year anniversary to remind motorists to
“steer it and clear it” to ensure minor traffic crashes don’t turn into major
pileups. The agency is also putting up signs in the St. Louis and Kansas
City areas with the “steer it and clear it” message.
“If you’re involved in a minor traffic crash and there aren’t any injuries, you
need to move your vehicle onto the shoulder or other nearby location off of
the roadway. Every minute a vehicle stops on the freeway and blocks one
lane of traffic, it backs up approaching traffic for four minutes.”
The law, known as the “Move It” law also helps reduce the chance of
motorists being involved in secondary crashes, which cause 18 percent of
fatalities in Missouri.
Filing an Accident Report
Under certain circumstances, you are required to file an accident report with
the Department. State law requires the accident report to be filed within
30 days. Even if the accident happened in a parking lot, or a settlement is
made, you must report an accident to the Driver License Bureau if:
• 	The accident happened in Missouri;
• 	The accident happened less than one year ago;

-- 83 of 102 --

82
• 	Someone involved in the accident did not have liability insurance
coverage; AND
• 	There is damage to or more person’s property in excess of $500,
or there was personal injury or death.
In other circumstances, you may not be required to report the accident,
but you may want to report it anyway. If the accident did not cause more
than $500 in property damage, personal injury, or death, you may still
file an accident report if there was an uninsured motorist involved. The
Department will only be able to take action against the uninsured motorist
for not maintaining insurance.
You may obtain a Motor Vehicle Accident Report (Form 1140) from the
Department’s website, your insurance company or agent, or from any
license office.
After you fill out the accident report, you may mail or fax it to the Department:
Missouri Driver License Bureau
301 West High Street — Room 470
P.O. Box 200
Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-0200
Fax: (573) 526-7365
Traffic Crash - Designated Construction, Work, or Emergency Zone
If you are involved in a motor vehicle crash and struck a highway worker or
emergency responder within a designated construction, work, or emergency
zone your driving privilege may be revoked according to Sections
304 585 6 and 304 894 6 RSMo

-- 84 of 102 --

83
Safety Inspections
Safety inspections are required to register or renew the registration on many
motor vehicles. There are some exceptions, which are discussed in the next
section.
Chapter 10 discussed that you need to be in shape to drive. Just the same,
your vehicle needs to be in shape to be driven.
Your vehicle safety inspection is good for two registration years unless you
sell the vehicle. “Even” model year vehicles (like 2018) must be inspected
when their registration expires during “even” calendar years. “Odd” model
year vehicles (like 2017) must be inspected when their registration expires
during “odd” calendar years. Each official inspection station may charge an
inspection fee not to exceed $12 (or up to $10 for a motorcycle inspection).
If your vehicle passes the safety inspection, the inspection station will give
you a certificate of inspection to show as proof. The certificate is good for
60 days. If you purchased a vehicle from a Missouri dealer, the certificate
provided by the Missouri dealer is good for 90 days if the inspection was
completed within 60 days prior to the purchase date.
Your vehicle registration renewal notice will assist you in determining
whether an inspection is required for your next renewal.
Exceptions to the Requirement
The following types of vehicles are exempt from the safety inspection
requirement:
• 	Motor vehicles for the first ten years following the model year of manufacture
and having less than 150,000 miles on the odometer are exempt from the
safety inspection requirement. This includes vehicles with an out-of-state title.
Example: A 2017 model year vehicle where the mileage continues to be less
than 150,000 miles, the vehicle would be exempt from the safety inspection
through and including calendar year 2027.
• 	All trailers.
• 	Motor vehicles engaged in intrastate commerce and registered with the
Missouri Department of Transportation.
• 	Motor vehicles that display historic license plates.
• 	Motor vehicles sold for junk, salvage, or rebuilding.
• 	Motor vehicles sold from dealer to dealer.
• 	Low speed vehicles as defined in Section 304 029, RSMo.
• 	Motor vehicles registered for 26,000 pounds or above, and registered
for a period of less than 12 months. Note: Renewal notice will list a
safety inspection requirement; however, if the office issues or renews
the registration on or after April 1st, an inspection is not required.
If your vehicle does not fit into the exceptions listed above, it will be required
to pass a safety inspection. Any licensed inspection station may inspect
your vehicle for safety. Authorized stations will display the sign shown on
Page 54. Read your motor vehicle renewal notice for guidance regarding
your vehicle’s safety inspection requirement.
Chapter 14 - Safety and Emissions Inspections & Required Equipment

-- 85 of 102 --

84
Equipment Needed
Brakes — Brakes must be in good working order.
Headlights — Your vehicle must have at least two functioning white
headlights.
Taillights — Your vehicle must have at least two functioning red taillights
and reflectors that other drivers can see from 500 feet.
Signaling Devices — Your vehicle must have functioning turn signals and
brake lights as originally installed by the manufacturer.
Steering Mechanism — Your vehicle’s steering mechanism must not have
too much play or binding.
Tires and Wheels — You must not have bald or mismatched tires on your
vehicle.
Safety Glass — If your vehicle was made after January 1, 1936, it must
have safety glass in all windows.
Windshield — The viewing area of your windshield may not be badly broken.
Vision Reducing Material — Your vehicle must not have anything on the
windshield that will reduce your visibility, except labels and stickers required
by law or ordinance, and informational signs on the upper portion of the
windshield normally tinted by manufacturers.
Windshield Wipers — Your vehicle’s windshield wipers must work.
Seat Belts — If your passenger car was made after June 30, 1964, it must
have two sets of seat belts in the front seat.
Horn — Your vehicle must have a functioning horn that other drivers and
pedestrians can hear.
Exhaust System — Your vehicle must have an attached exhaust pipe,
muffler, and tailpipe.
Mirrors — If your vehicle was made after 1967, it must have an inside and
an outside rearview mirror.
Air Pollution Control Devices — If your vehicle was made after 1967 and
does not have a diesel motor, it must have air pollution control devices.
These pollution control devices must be as originally installed by the
manufacturer.
Fuel System — The fuel system, including all lines, hoses, connections,
and tank(s), must be firmly attached and must not leak.
Mud Flaps — Trucks without rear fenders, registered for over 24,000
pounds, must have mud flaps.
Bumpers — Bumpers on passenger vehicles may not exceed 22 inches
above the ground when measured at the highest point. Commercial vehicle
bumper heights are determined by gross vehicle weight rating.
Other Equipment Required by Law
In addition to the equipment needed to pass the safety inspection, Missouri
law requires the following equipment:

-- 86 of 102 --

85
License (Registration) Plates — Missouri law requires that license plates be
securely fastened to a vehicle, and that all parts of the plates are visible and
clean for view or inspection by any law enforcement entity. If you have frames
around your license plates, the MSHP reminds you that the frames must not
cover any part of the plates.
If you receive two plates, you must place one on the front and one on the
back of your vehicle.
If you have a trailer or a motorcycle, you will only receive one plate, which
must be on the back of your vehicle.
If you have a truck licensed in excess of 12,000 pounds, you will only
receive one plate, which must be placed on the front of the truck. If you
want a second plate, it must be specifically requested. You must place the
original plate on the front of your truck and if a second plate is issued, it
must be placed on the rear of the truck.
License Plate Light — Your vehicle must have a white light shining on the
rear license plate so the plate can be seen from 50 feet.
Projections — You need special equipment if something in your vehicle
overhangs the rear by more than five feet. During the day, the end of the
projection must have a red flag or cloth that is at least 16” square. The end
of the projection must have a red light from ½ hour after sunset until ½ hour
before sunrise.
Towlines — When you are towing another vehicle, your towline must keep
the vehicles within 15 feet of each other. From ½ hour after sunset until ½
hour before sunrise, both vehicles must have lights on.
Slow Moving Vehicle Sign — From sunset to ½ hour before sunrise, any
vehicle moving 25 mph or slower must have a “slow moving vehicle” sign
(refer to Chapter 3). The sign must be on the rear of the vehicle, near the
middle, and four feet or more above the road. The sign must be clean and
reflective.
Studded Snow Tires — Your vehicle may have studded snow tires only
from November 1 to April 1.
Window Tinting — Tinting or sun-screening material is permitted on the
side and rear windows (front door windows at no more than 65% light
blockage).
Emissions Inspections
Motorists residing in St. Louis City and the counties of St. Louis, St.
Charles, Franklin, and Jefferson are also required to have emissions
inspections, if applicable. There are some exceptions, which are listed on
the next page.
For information on emissions inspections not covered in this Guide, please
call 1-866-623-8378, or visit the Department of Natural Resources website
at http://dnr mo gov/ and look for the Gateway Vehicle Inspection Program
(GVIP).

-- 87 of 102 --

86
The emissions inspection is a two-year inspection. Just like the safety
inspection, “even” model year vehicles with registrations expiring in “even”
years must be inspected during “even” calendar years. “odd” model year
vehicles with registrations expiring in “odd” years must be inspected during
“odd” calendar years.
All vehicles must be emissions inspected at the time of sale regardless of
the model year (refer to the list of exceptions below). New motor vehicles
and the first retail sale of titled motor vehicles during the model year of the
vehicle and the following year, are exempt from the inspection requirement
provided the odometer reading is less than 6,000 miles at the time of sale.
Exceptions to the Requirement
The following motor vehicles are exempt from the emissions inspection
requirement:
• 	New motor vehicles, not previously titled, during the model year of the
vehicle and the following year, provided there is no change in ownership.
• 	1995 and older gasoline-powered vehicles.
• 	1996 and older diesel-powered vehicles.
• 	Motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
over 8,500 pounds.
• 	New motor vehicles not previously titled and registered for the four-year
period following their model year of manufacture, with fewer than 40,000
miles at the first required biennial inspection.
• 	Motor vehicles that are driven fewer than 12,000 miles between biennial
safety inspections
• 	Vehicles powered by fuels other than gasoline, ethanol or diesel.
• 	Motor vehicles that display “historic plates”, school bus, shuttle bus,
motorcycle, motortricycle, or street rod plates.
• 	Gasoline-powered low speed vehicles in Franklin County only.
• 	Motor vehicles registered in one of the affected areas (St. Louis City and
the counties of St. Louis, St. Charles, Franklin, and Jefferson) but based
and operated outside the area for 24 consecutive months.

-- 88 of 102 --

87
You will need to know the following information if you are applying for a
Class E license. As a driver of a commercial vehicle, you must obey all
Missouri traffic laws including the laws on commercial vehicles.
Note:
• 	All size and weight limits listed below include the load of the vehicle.
• 	All limits that refer to interstates or certain designated highways include
roads up to ten miles from the interstate or highway.
• 	The size and weight and exceptions listed in this chapter are for Missouri
highways only.
Size Limitations (Without Special Permit)
Height
• 	Maximum height of any vehicle outside of a commercial zone* on
designated highways plus ten miles therefrom .................................14’
• 	Maximum height of any vehicle in a commercial zone......................15’
• 	Maximum height on all other highways .............................................13½’
Width
• Maximum width of any vehicle .............................................................8½’
*Commercial Zone — Commercial zones exist only in cities with a population
of 75,000 or more. The commercial zone is one mile beyond the city limits
plus one mile for every 50,000 residents or portion thereof, except:
• 	The commercial zone for St. Louis City extends 18 miles beyond the city
limits.
• 	The commercial zone for Kansas City extends 12 miles beyond the
city limits and includes the city of Harrisonville.
• 	The commercial zones for Springfield, St. Joseph, and Columbia
extends only two miles beyond the city limits.
• 	The commercial zone on interstate highways extends only two miles
beyond the city limits.
Length
• 	Maximum length of any single vehicle .................................................45’
• 	Maximum length of any bus or trackless trolley coach not
including one foot in front and back for safety bumper ........................45’
• 	Maximum length of truck-tractor and semi-trailer
○ upon interstates and certain designated highways the length of the
semi-trailer (no overall maximum length, includes load) .................53’
○ upon all other roads .........................................................................60’
• 	Maximum length of truck-tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer combinations
(double bottoms)
○ upon interstates and certain designated highways the length of the
semi-trailer or trailer (no overall maximum length) ..........................28’
○ upon all other roads .........................................................................65’
• 	Maximum length of truck and trailer(s) and all other combinations of vehicles
○ upon interstates and certain primary highways ..............................65’
○ the overall maximum length upon all other roads ..........................55’
Chapter 15 - Commercial Vehicles

-- 89 of 102 --

88
• 	Maximum length of Automobile Transporters and Boat Transporters
○ Conventional 5th Wheel 	75’ for combination unit plus
○ Stingersteered 	75’ 3’ front to 4’ rear overhang.
• 	Maximum length of Driveaway Saddle Mount Combinations (Double or
Triple on interstate and designated highways)....................................97’
Motor vehicle carriers may carry loads that extend beyond their legal length
limits. Loads must not extend more than three feet beyond the front or four
feet beyond the rear of the vehicle.
Exemptions
• 	Farm machinery driven occasionally for short distances;
• 	Vehicles temporarily transporting farm machinery;
• 	Implement dealers delivering or moving farm machinery for repair;
• 	Vehicles temporarily transporting road-making machines or road
materials; and
• 	Vehicles towing disabled vehicles for repair on highways.
These exemptions do not include interstate highways.
Weight Limitations (Without Special Permit)
A bridge’s weight limit may differ from the road’s weight limit. If a bridge has
a different weight limit, the limit will be posted.
Maximum Weight on Any Single Axle 	Pounds
• 	Maximum weight allowed on interstates.......................................20,000
• 	Maximum weight allowed in a commercial zone ..........................22,400
• 	Maximum weight allowed on all other routes ...............................22,000
Maximum Weight on Any Tandem Axle 	Pounds
• 	Maximum weight allowed on interstates.......................................34,000
• 	Maximum weight allowed on all other routes ...............................36,000
Maximum Gross Weight 	Pounds
The actual gross weight allowed depends on the distance from the first to
last axle. To determine the maximum gross weight allowed in a commercial
zone, multiply the number of axles by 22,400 pounds. The maximum gross
weight allowed on all highways in Missouri is 80,000 pounds, except where
bridge structures are posted with lesser weight limits.
• 	Maximum gross weight allowed on interstates, primary and other
designated highways ....................................................................80,000
Overdimension and Overweight Permits
You may apply for an overdimension or overweight permit by calling
1-800-877-8499, or (573) 751-2871 for local calls only, or by contacting:
Missouri Department of Transportation, Motor Carrier Services Unit
P.O. Box 893
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Fax: (573) 751-7408
To receive an oversize or overweight permit:
• 	The load on your vehicle must be non-reducible;
• 	You must have property damage and bodily injury liability insurance; and
• 	You must pay a permit fee.

-- 90 of 102 --

89
Vehicle Route Map
The Missouri Vehicle Route Map is available from the Missouri Department
of Transportation. This map shows the routes on which the larger and
heavier trucks are allowed to travel as specified by state statute. You may
obtain a map by calling 1-866-831-6277 or by contacting:
Missouri Department of Transportation, Motor Carrier Services
P.O. Box 893
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Fax: (573) 751-7408
contactus@modot mo gov
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
Missouri has adopted as state law Parts 390 through 397 of the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. Therefore, drivers and vehicles operating
solely intrastate must obey those regulations except for the following
exemptions:
• 	Commercial vehicles with a GVWR or GCWR of 26,000 lbs. or less than
26,001 GVWR unless transporting hazardous materials or passengers.
• 	Commercial vehicles licensed for gross weight of 60,000 pounds or less
when used only for the transportation of solid waste.
• 	Commercial vehicles licensed for 42,000 pounds or less for farm use and
indicated by the letter “F” on the license plate as authorized by Section
301 030, RSMo, unless transporting hazardous materials except fertilizer.
Transporting Hazardous Material
If you are transporting hazardous material, your vehicle must comply with
the equipment and operating regulations of the United States Department
of Transportation.
Emergency Equipment And Signals
When operating wholly within the state, Missouri law does not require
emergency equipment for:
• 	Vehicles licensed for 42,000 pounds or less with an “F” plate;
• 	Solid waste haulers licensed for 60,000 pounds or less; and
• 	Commercial vehicles licensed for 12,000 pounds or less.
Any other commercial motor vehicle used for intrastate or interstate
commerce that is licensed for more than 12,000 pounds must carry the
following emergency equipment:
• 	One fire extinguisher. The extinguisher must be rated at 5 B:C or more
by Underwriter’s Laboratories Incorporated.
• 	One spare fuse or other overload protective device for each kind and
size used, if the devices are not of a reset type.
• 	One of the following combination of warning devices:
○ 	Three flares (liquid-burning pot torches) and three fuses and two red
flags. This combination must not be carried by vehicles transporting
explosive or flammable material or using flammable compressed gas
as a motor fuel.
○ 	Three red electric lanterns and two red flags.
○ 	Three bi-directional emergency red reflective triangles.

-- 91 of 102 --

90
Information on Commercial Motor Vehicles
The following information must be clearly visible on commercial motor vehicles:
• The name of the owner;
• The address the vehicle is operated from and the number issued to a
motor carrier by the Motor Carrier Services. (USDOT 123456 MO); and
• The word “Local” displayed on every local commercial vehicle. For-hire
carriers must display their USDOT number followed by the letters “MO”.
Your vehicle does not need to show the above information if:
• It is licensed for 36,000 pounds or less; and
• It is not regularly used for commercial purposes.
Following Distance
If you are driving a bus or truck, you must not follow another bus or truck
any closer than 300 feet. However, you may follow closer than 300 feet
when you are in a business or residential district, or when passing. Always
stay a safe distance behind the vehicle in front of you. For each ten feet
of length in your vehicle, keep at least one second between you and the
vehicle in front of you. For example, if you are driving a 40-foot vehicle,
keep four seconds between you and the vehicle in front of you.
Railroad Crossing
You must stop within 15 to 50 feet before the railroad tracks if you are
driving a:
• Motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
• School bus;
• Motor vehicle carrying material that is corrosive, flammable, explosive, or
poisonous; or
• Motor vehicle used for the transportation of flammable or corrosive
liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty.
If there is no sign of a train, you may cross the tracks.
Load Security
To avoid any part of a load falling off your vehicle, you must secure it or
have a protective cover on it.
Off-Tracking
When a vehicle turns, the rear wheels take a shorter path than the front
wheels. The greater the distance between the front and rear wheels, the
greater the difference in their paths. To compensate for the off-tracking,
begin a left-turn as far to the right as possible. Begin a right-turn as far to
the left as possible.
Weigh Stations
All commercial motor vehicles must stop at weigh stations except those
licensed for 18,000 pounds or less or otherwise exempted by law, unless
directed by a peace officer.
Tailgaters
To avoid a crash with a tailgater, you should:
• Slow down. It is better to be tailgated at a low speed than a high speed.
• Avoid any sudden turns or stops and signal well in advance.

-- 92 of 102 --

91
• Increase the distance between you and the vehicle in front of you. This
will help you to avoid any sudden stops.
• Do not flash your taillights or brake lights at the tailgater. The tailgater
may not believe your brake lights when you do slow down or stop.
Space Overhead
Make sure you have enough space over your vehicle at all times.
• 	Do not assume that posted heights at bridges or underpasses are correct.
• 	Check all wires, signs, trees, and air conditioning units.
Soft Surfaces
Make sure the surface will hold the weight of your vehicle. Be wary of:
• Parking lots;
• Unpaved roads or parking areas, especially when wet; and
• Construction areas.
Space to Cross or Enter Traffic
Your acceleration rate varies with the weight of your vehicle. And your time
to cross the road is also affected by the length of your vehicle. In a long or
heavily weighted vehicle, you will need a larger gap to cross the road than
you would in a car.

-- 93 of 102 --

92
Distracted Driving
Driving is a skill that requires your full attention to safely operate your
vehicle and respond to events happening around you. Driving involves
constant and complex coordination between your mind and body. Events or
things that prevent you from operating your car safely are distractions. All
distractions endanger driver, passenger, and bystander safety. These types
of distractions include, but are not limited to:
• 	Texting 	• 	Grooming
• 	Using a cell phone or smartphone 	• 	Reading, including maps;
• 	Eating and drinking 	• 	Watching a video
• 	Talking to passengers 	• 	Surfing the Internet.
• 	Adjusting a radio, CD player, or 	• 	Using a navigation system
MP3 player
Because text messaging requires visual, manual, and cognitive attention
from the driver, it is by far the most high risk distraction. It is against the law
for any person to read, write, or send a text message or electronic message
while operating a vehicle.
Are you being driven to distraction?
• 	What do children, friends, and pets all have in common? All can be a
dangerous distraction to you while you are driving.
• 	Teach your young children that driving is an important job and that you
must concentrate when you are behind the wheel. If you need to attend
to your children, pull over to a safe place. Don’t try to handle children
while you are driving.
• 	A carload of friends can be very distracting with loud talking, arguing
over music selections, or horseplay. Arguments and other disturbing
conversations should be held in a safe, appropriate place, not while you
are driving in your vehicle.
• 	A loose pet in a moving vehicle can be very dangerous. Properly secure
your pet in a pet carrier, portable kennel, or specially designed pet
harness when you are driving. Never allow your pet to sit on your lap
while you are driving your vehicle.
Turning Dials Can Turn Your Head
• Making destination entries on an in-vehicle navigation system, radio
surfing for a good song, or adjusting your vehicle’s climate controls are
distracting activities that can put you in danger of a vehicle crash or
near-crash. The availability of in-vehicle Internet and e-mail access from
cell/smart phones, and other portable devices are added distractions that
increase your risk of a crash if you engage in these activities while driving.
• Adjust vehicle’s controls (climate controls, mirrors, radio, seat, etc.)
before you begin to drive.
• Check your e-mail, voicemail, and any other portable devices you have
before you begin driving, or when you reach your destination.
• Place an auto-reply message on your cell phone stating you are driving
and will call them back later.
Chapter 16 - Districted Driving and Electronic Communication Devices

-- 94 of 102 --

93
• Take advantage of normal stops to adjust controls.
• Ask your passengers to adjust the radio, climate control, navigation system,
etc., for you.
Looks Can Kill
Looking out your window at what you are passing while you are driving can
be a distraction if you are concentrating on getting a good look at:
• A crash scene 	• 	A billboard advertisement
• A vehicle pulled over 	• 	Street names and addresses
by law enforcement 	• 	Construction work
• A scenic view
Always focus on your driving. It’s crucial that you remain alert while on the
road to arrive at your destination safely.
Electronic Communication Devices
It is against the law for any driver of a noncommercial or commercial motor
vehicle, on any highway or property open to the public for vehicular traffic, to
use an electronic communication device.
Under the new law, while the vehicle is in motion, drivers are prohibited from:
• 	Physically holding or supporting a cellphone with any part of their body.
• Manually typing, writing, sending, or reading text-based messages.
• Recording, posting, sending or broadcasting video, including video calls
and social media posts.
• Watching a video or movie.
The new law does allow drivers to:
• Place or receive voice calls utilizing voice-operated or hands-free
functions that can be engaged/disengaged with a single touch or swipe
• Talk on the phone, hands-free, utilizing features like built-in phone
speaker, in-car Bluetooth, or ear bud/headset
• Send or receive text-based communication through voice-to-text features
• Utilize cellphone GPS navigation and music or podcast functions
• Using a device to access or view a map for navigational purposes; or to
access or listen to a broadcast or digital audio recording.
• Driver using a device to relay information through a transportation
network company’s digital network to a company driver provided the
device is affixed or mounted to the vehicle.
Prior to January 1, 2025, drivers violating these provisions of use of an
electronic communication device may be subject to a warning. After that
date, a violation of these provisions may be subject to an infraction.
Commercial drivers violating this section may be subject to disqualification.
Fines and criminal penalties may also apply as defined by law in Section
§304.822.6 RSMo.
93

-- 95 of 102 --

94
Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .68-73
Bicycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31-33
Blind Awareness Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Boater Safety Indicator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12-13
Blood Alcohol Content (BAC). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .68-72
Child Restraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55-56
Commercial Driver License (Class A, B, or C). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 10
Commercial Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .88-92
Contact Us . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 96
Crosswalks and Stop Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42-43
Defensive Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .56-62
Deny Driver License (Parent/Guardian) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Distracted Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .92-93
Driver License (Class F). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Driver License Renewal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-8, 10-11
Driver License Restrictions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Driving Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18-21
Failing The Driving Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Duplicate Driver License (Lost, Stolen,or Destroyed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40-41
Emergency Vehicles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 27
Emissions Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .86-87
Endorsements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9-10
Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18-21
When You Must Take The Exam: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Where To Take the Exam. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Expiration, License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10-11
Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Failure To Appear in Court For Traffic
Violations (FACT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Fees for Permits/Licenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Financial Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78, 80-83
Following Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57-58, 91
For-Hire License (Class E). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5, 18
Full Driver License (Under 21) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 16-17
Funeral Processions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Graduated Driver License Law (GDL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15-17
Hand Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Highway Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37-41
Highway Hypnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
How to Lose Your License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Index

-- 96 of 102 --

95
Inspection (Vehicle Safety). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84-87
Instruction Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 15
Insurance (Types of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Intermediate License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 15-16
“DHH” Notation For Deaf or Hard of
Hearing Applicants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Licenses (Types of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4-5
License Checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
License Plates
Lost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Personalized and Specialty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Littering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Mandatory Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .80-83
Medical Referral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Military Mail-in Driver License Renewal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Missouri Residential Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-7
Mopeds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31-33
Motorcycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Motorcycle Instruction Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3-4
Motorcycle License (Class M) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Name Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Nondriver Identification Card (ND) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Notice of Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11-12
Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35-36
Pavement Markings & Meanings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42-43
Pedestrians. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30-31
Permanent Disability Indicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Permits (Types of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3-4
Physical and Mental Effects of Alcohol and Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Point System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74-75
Proof of Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70-71, 75, 80-81
Required Documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-8
Required Documentation Exemption for
Senior Citizens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-7
Requirements to Obtain License/Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-6
Road Rage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33-34
Road Sign Test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Roundabout Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26-27
Rules of the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22-27
Safe Driving Tips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55-62
Safety Inspection and Equipment Needed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84-86
School Bus Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23-24
Seat Belts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55-56
95

-- 97 of 102 --

96
Selective Service Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Selling a Vehicle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Sharing the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28-34
Special Driving Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .63-67
Stopping Distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Suspension or Revocation of Your License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Tabs (Lost, Destroyed, or Stolen) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Tailgating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57, 91-92
Tire Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Traffic Crashes
What To Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82-83
Reporting A Crash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82-83
Traffic Officers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Traffic Signals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .43-45
Traffic Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45-51
Colors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46-54
U-Turns. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Vehicle Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .65-67
Vehicle Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Vehicle Titling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .76-78
Verification of Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-8
Verification of Lawful Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Verification of Social Security Number. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Veteran Designation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Vision Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18-19
Failing The Vision Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Voter Registration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Website. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law
Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61-62
Written Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

-- 98 of 102 --

97
Contact Information
Driver License Questions 	Phone Number
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 751-1887
Automated Information 24 / 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 526-2407
Motor Vehicle Questions
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 526-3669
State Highway Patrol
Troop A, Lee’s Summit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (816) 622-0800
Troop B, Macon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (660) 385-2132
Troop C, Weldon Spring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (636) 300-2800
Troop D, Springfield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (417) 895-6868
Troop E, Poplar Bluff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 840-9500
Troop F, Jefferson City. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 751-1000
Troop G, Willow Springs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (417) 469-3121
Troop H, St. Joseph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (816) 387-2345
Troop I, Rolla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 368-2345
Highway Patrol Statewide Toll Free Emergency
Assistance Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-800-525-5555
or cellular *55
97

-- 99 of 102 --

98
Safety is on Your Shoulders
Since 1931, 31 MSHP Troopers have been killed in the line of duty. Eight
of those officers were killed after being struck by a vehicle, whose driver
was either impaired or not paying attention. The number-one contributing
circumstance to traffic crashes in Missouri is driver inattention. Please slow
down and move over away from stationary vehicles along the side of the
road with their emergency equipment activated. IT’S THE LAW.
The law (Section 304 022, RSMo ) requires
motorists to yield the right-of-way and immediately
drive to a position parallel to, and as far as
possible to the right of, the traveled portion of the
highway and thereupon stop and remain in such
position until such emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police or
traffic officer.
A revision to the law, which became effective August 28, 2017, requires
motorists upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying
lighted red or red and blue lights, or vehicles displaying amber or amber
and white lights:
(1) Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible, with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change into
a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a roadway
having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the
same direction as the approaching vehicle; or
(2) Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would
be unsafe or impossible.
Violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor.

-- 100 of 102 --

99	99

-- 101 of 102 --

100
In memory of
those who have given their lives
in the line of duty on Missouri roads.

-- 102 of 102 --