Parent, if your child is under the age of 18, please
read pages 1 through 6 and pages 40 through 45.
2023-2025
Class D
Noncommercial
Driver License Manual

-- 1 of 56 --

Greetings from the Office of the Governor!
It’s my privilege to welcome you as a North Dakota driver. Whether you are operating a car,
truck, motorcycle or RV, or enjoying our communities as a bicyclist or pedestrian, everyone who
uses our roads shares a responsibility to make transportation safe and enjoyable. This booklet
contains important information outlining the state’s rules and regulations for keeping you and
other drivers safe on North Dakota’s roadways.
Please review this information and make the personal commitment to adhere to the rules of the
road and to be aware of new laws that affect the motoring public, including distracted driving
laws. We want to help you stay safe – as a driver and valued community member.
Sincerely,
Jack Dalrymple
Governor
Introduction:
The privilege of driving a motor vehicle in the state of North Dakota must first be earned. This
manual will help you earn and keep this privilege.
The manual is designed as a basic reference for all drivers, and should be used to prepare for
the written driver’s examination. It does not include some of the information needed to qualify
for driving passenger buses, school buses, motorcycles, and heavy trucks. Such additional in-
formation is contained in separate manuals available at all driver license offices.
This manual will introduce you to North Dakota traffic laws, rules of the road, and other safe
driving practices. You owe it to yourself to develop all the skills and knowledge needed to become
a safe driver.
Driver License Division
North Dakota Department of Transportation
608 East Boulevard Avenue
Bismarck, ND 58505-0750
www.dot.nd.gov
DL0623

-- 2 of 56 --

North Dakota Driver License and Testing Locations
To obtain a North Dakota operator’s license, you must visit one of the Driver License offices,
or you may take your knowledge test immediately at nd.knowtodrive.com. An appointment is
required. Please visit our website to book an appointment or obtain appointment information at
dot.nd.gov.
Please note: You will receive a failed test score if you leave the testing area while your test is
in progress.
The knowledge test fee is $5. The road test fee is $5. The fee for a Class D permit/license is
$15. The fee for a duplicate Class D permit/license is $8.
Lunch Hour Schedule: All sites closed from 12:00-1:00 p.m. except Bismarck, Minot, Grand
Forks, and Fargo.
Holiday Schedule: Offices are closed on the following holidays:
New Years Day, January 1 - Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, the third Monday in January
Presidents’ Day, third Monday in February
Good Friday, the Friday preceding Easter Sunday
Memorial Day, the last Monday in May - Independence Day, July 4
Labor Day, the first Monday in September - Veteran’s Day, November 11
Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November
Christmas Eve, December 24 (offices close at noon)
Christmas Day, December 25
If January 1st, July 4th, November 11th, or December 25th fall on a Sunday, the following Mon-
day shall be the holiday. If these holidays fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is the holiday.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
YOUR OPERATOR’S LICENSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND ROAD MARKINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
RULES OF THE ROAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
DRIVING SKILLS AND EMERGENCY SITUATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
DRINKING, DRUGS, AND DRIVING. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
PARENT/GUARDIAN DRIVER COACHING TIPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
SUPERVISED DRIVING LOG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

-- 3 of 56 --


-- 4 of 56 --

1
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
Driver License Offices
For current office locations and hours, go to
www.dot.nd.gov. Click on Driver.
For road test appointments visit our website
at www.dot.nd.gov or dial toll-free at 1-855-
633-6835.
For online knowledge testing visit
nd.knowtodrive.com.
TTY users may call: Relay North Dakota at
711. For services that can be done online, go
to www.dot.nd.gov, click on Driver.
General Information
All drivers license offices are ADA accessible.
Language interpretation for general business
is provided for people with limited English
proficiency (LEP).
Additionally, the Request For Reasonable Ac-
commodations (SFN 60135) can be accessed
at 	the 	following 	NDDOT website 	location:
http://www.dot.nd.gov/forms/sfn60135.pdf
The noncommercial (Class D) knowledge test
is offered in English, Arabic, Spanish, Somali,
Russian, Vietnamese, Turkish, Swahili, Ne-
pali, Serbo-Croatian, French, Pashto, Dari
and Chinese. Automated American Sign Lan-
guage and Audio testing is available at the
Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck, Dickinson, Wil-
liston, Minot, Devils Lake, and Grand Forks
driver license offices.
The motorcycle (Class M) knowledge test is
offered in English and Spanish. Automated
American Sign Language and Audio testing is
available at the Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck,
Dickinson, Williston, Minot, Devils Lake, and
Grand Forks driver license offices. The com-
mercial (CDL) knowledge tests are offered in
English only. Audio testing is available at the
Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck, Dickinson, Wil-
liston, 	Minot, Devils Lake, and Grand Forks
driver license offices.
CHECK LIST FOR TESTING
You will not be allowed to test without proper
identification.
1. Knowledge test items:
 Proof of legal presence, current name
and date of birth. See list of acceptable
forms of identification on page 5.
 Proof of North Dakota resident address.
See list of acceptable documents on
page 6.
 As authorized by NDCC 39-06-07 and
NDCC 39-06-03.1, all applications for
permit, license, or identification card
must contain the social security num-
ber of the applicant.
 All applicants less than 18 years of age
must have a parent, legal guardian, or
designated person sign approval and
sponsorship on the application. Legal
guardian 	must 	present 	guardianship
papers.
 Arrive no later than one hour prior to
noon, if testing at an office that closes
for lunch, and no later than one hour
prior to closing. You may not be allowed
to test otherwise.
 Children, pets (except medical alert/
service 	animals), 	backpacks, 	purs-
es, paper, pen, pencil, markers, cell
phones, notebooks and any other elec-
tronic devices are not allowed in the
knowledge testing area.
IMPORTANT: You will receive a failed
test score if you bring any of these
items into the testing area. You are re-
sponsible for securing these items in a
safe place prior to testing. You will also
receive a failed test score if you leave
the knowledge testing area before your
test is completed.

-- 5 of 56 --

2
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
2. Road Test Items:
 Valid North Dakota operator’s permit.
 Applicants less than 16 years of age
are required to present a driver’s edu-
cation Certificate of Training.
 See page 4, Road Test Waiver details.
Applies to ages 15 and older.
 Applicants under 16 must be accompa-
nied by a parent or legal guardian.
 Applicant must provide current vehicle
registration for vehicle used during road
test.
 Applicant must provide current proof of
insurance for vehicle used during road
test.
 All road test vehicles must pass an
equipment inspection prior to road test.
 Arrive early for your appointment to
ensure everything is in order for your
scheduled test.
 Pets (except medical alert/service ani-
mals), passengers, and electronic de-
vices such as cell phones, ipods, etc.,
will not be allowed in the vehicle during
the road test.
Self-parking vehicles are not allowed. The ap-
plicant must test in a different vehicle or deac-
tivate the self-parking feature.
VEHICLE INSPECTION
Part of your responsibility as a driver is to
keep your vehicle in safe running condition.
You must allow driver examiner personnel to
inspect your vehicle.
Before you take your road test, your vehicle
will be inspected. In order to pass inspection,
your vehicle must be currently registered and
have the following equipment in proper work-
ing order:
• Brakes—for stopping and parking.
• Headlights—with high and low beams.
• Brake lights and taillights.
• Turn signals.
• A leak-free 	exhaust 	system, 	including 	a
muffler.
• Doors - function from inside and outside of
vehicle
• A horn clearly audible for 200 feet.
• Mirrors—one or more so that you can see
the road 200 feet behind you.
• Seat belts.
• A windshield and windows—all made of
safety glass. If tinted, a light transmittance
of 70 percent for the windshield and at least
50 percent for other windows is required.
• Windshield wipers.
NOTE: The road test will not be administered
if the above items or any other factors lend
themselves to an unsafe vehicle or unsafe
working environment.
YOUR OPERATOR’S LICENSE
Any person other than a nonresident student,
a tourist, or a nonresident member of the
Armed Forces who has lived in this state for
90 consecutive days, shall be deemed a resi-
dent of North Dakota for the purpose of driver
licensing. You may operate a Class D or M ve-
hicle with an operator’s license from another
state for a period of 60 days after you become
a resident of North Dakota. Then you are re-
quired to take the necessary tests to obtain a
North Dakota operator’s license. Class A, B,
or C vehicle operators have 30 days in which
to acquire a North Dakota Commercial Driver
License. Proof of North Dakota resident ad-
dress is required.
By knowing and understanding the rules of
the road, and by demonstrating your ability to
operate your vehicle, you will earn the privi-
lege of driving in North Dakota.
Except for the exemptions listed, all North
Dakota residents must have a valid North
Dakota operator’s license or permit in order

-- 6 of 56 --

3
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	 	R	 	evised 2 023
to drive in North Dakota. For your operator’s
license or permit to be valid, it must be signed
by you. You must have this license or permit
in your possession every time you drive.
EXEMPTIONS
1. Non-residents at least 16 years of age who
have 	in 	their 	possession 	valid 	licenses
from their home state or country, includ-
ing members of the Armed Forces while
stationed in North Dakota. A non-resident
must be at least 16 years of age to drive in
North Dakota.
2. Employees of the United States govern-
ment or North Dakota National Guard while
operating a government vehicle on official
business.
3. North Dakota residents on active duty in
the Armed Forces outside North Dakota. If
these people held a valid operator’s license
when they left the state, it will remain valid
until 30 days after discharge or separation
from the service.
PEOPLE WHO CANNOT GET A LICENSE
1. Those under 16 years of age unless eligi-
ble for a restricted license.
2. People whose licenses are revoked or sus-
pended in this or any other state.
3. Applicants who have been determined to
be addicted to drugs or alcohol, or those
considered to be a hazard to public safe-
ty on our roadways because of mental or
physical disability.
4. Persons who have a history of epilepsy,
blackouts, seizures, fainting spells, or other
lapse of consciousness.
Exception to #4: The person in question has
had no seizures for at least six consecutive
months, and is willing to submit to the required
medical examination.
PERMITS
Instruction Permits allow you to legally prac-
tice driving. Any time you operate with an in-
struction permit, a person with a valid license
for the class of vehicle being driven, who is
at least 18 years of age and has had at least
three years of driving experience, must ride in
the seat beside you. An individual other than
the supervising driver and the permit holder
may not be in the front seat unless the ve-
hicle has only a front seat, in which case, the
supervising driver must be seated next to the
permit holder.
To receive a permit you must first pass the
knowledge examination at a Driver License
office or at nd.knowtodrive.com and the visu-
al screen test. All applicants must be at least
14 years of age. Applicants under 18 years
of age must have parent or legal guardian
approval and sponsorship. The sponsorship
must be signed by the father, mother, or legal
guardian (guardianship papers required). If
the father, mother, or legal guardian is unable
to appear, they may designate, through a no-
tarized document, an individual temporarily
authorized to sign; financial liability remains
with the father, mother, or legal guardian. If
there is no living parent or legal guardian, an-
other adult swearing responsibility for the mi-
nor may sign the sponsorship.
Individuals who are 14 or 15 years old must
hold the instruction permit for 12 months or
to the age of 16, whichever comes first, but
no less than six months, prior to completing
the road test or waiving the road test for an
operator’s license.
Individuals who are 16 or 17 must hold the
instruction permit for six months or to the age
of 18, whichever comes first, prior to complet-
ing the road test or waiving the road test for
an operator’s license.
Individuals under 16 must complete a mini-
mum of 50 hours of supervised practice driv-
ing in variable conditions. Your parent/legal
guardian must then accompany you to the
test site on the day of your road test and sign
that you have completed this requirement.
NOTE: This is in addition to the formal driv-
er’s education requirement.

-- 7 of 56 --

4
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
Road Test Waiver
The Class D road test may be waived by pre-
senting a North Dakota Driving School Cer-
tificate of Course Completion certifying you
have completed a minimum of 30 hours of
classroom driver training and a minimum of
six hours of actual behind the wheel driver
training that has been approved for waiver
purposes by the director of the North Dakota
Department of Transportation.
The Class D road test may also be waived
by presenting a North Dakota Department of
Public Instruction Student Completion Certifi-
cate certifying you have completed a minimum
of 30 hours of classroom driver training and
a minimum of six hours of actual behind the
wheel driver training that has been approved
for waiver purposes by the director of the
North Dakota Department of Transportation.
It is a two-point penalty on your driving record
for driving in violation of the conditions of an
instruction permit.
Additional penalties and statutory fees are
listed 	in 	the 	North 	Dakota 	Century 	Code
(NDCC), Chapter 39-06.1 Disposition of Traf-
fic Offenses.
A student enrolled in the high school driver ed-
ucation program may operate the driver edu-
cation vehicle without an operator’s license or
permit while under the supervision of a certified
operator training instructor, if the school district
sponsoring the training program has appropri-
ate insurance coverage for the student opera-
tor. To be eligible for behind-the-wheel training,
an applicant must be at least 14 years of age.
Motorcycle: If you are 14 or 15 years old, you
may receive a license to operate a motorcycle
by successfully completing an approved motor-
cycle safety course and passing the motorcycle
knowledge test. You must present a motorcycle
safety course completion certificate to obtain a
license.
Motorized Bicycle Permits: To operate a mo-
torized bicycle, you must be at least 14 years of
age or older and have in your immediate pos-
session a valid operator’s license, motorized bi-
cycle permit, temporary permit, instruction per-
mit, or motorcycle permit.
APPLYING FOR A LICENSE OR PERMIT
Applications for an operator’s license or permit
are made with the Driver License Division of the
Department of Transportation.
1. PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED.
All applicants must present proof of current name,
date of birth, and legal presence in the United
States. Acceptable forms of identification are:
• U.S. Birth Certificate (state certified; Gov-
ernment issued)
• U.S. Territory Birth Certificate (certified by
issuing authority)
• Valid, unexpired U.S. passport or valid, un-
expired U.S. passport card
• Report of Birth Abroad issued by the U.S.
Department of State
• Certificate of Naturalization
• Certificate of Citizenship
• Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card
• Valid, unexpired Employment Authoriza-
tion Card (Temporary Status)
• Valid, 	unexpired 	Foreign 	Passport 	with
I-94 (Temporary Status)
• Valid I-94 Card Stamped Refugee, Parole,
or Asylee (Temporary Status)
No photocopies. No hospital certificates. All
documents must be original or certified cop-
ies only.
If your current name is different than the name
on your identity document, you will need to
bring additional proof of your legal name.
Acceptable documents for proof of name
change are a certified marriage certificate,
a certified adoption document, or a certified
court order authorizing a name change (no
photocopies, court seal required).
You will not be allowed to test or obtain a
North Dakota permit, license, or non- driv-
er identification card without proper iden-
tification.

-- 8 of 56 --

5
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
Applicants born in North Dakota may obtain a
copy of their certified birth certificate by con-
tacting Vital Records at the North Dakota De-
partment of Health (visit www.ndhealth.gov/
vital for details).
2. PROOF OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
As authorized by NDCC 39-06-07 and 39-06-
03.1, all applications for permit, license, or identifi-
cation card must contain the individual’s social se-
curity number. The document must contain name
and full social security number. Proof is required
by presenting one of the following documents:
• Social Security Card (actual blue and
white card)
• W-2 Form
• SSA 1099 Form
• Non-SSA 1099 Form
• Pay stub
3. PROOF 	OF 	NORTH 	DAKOTA 	RESI-
DENCE ADDRESS
Proof 	of 	North 	Dakota 	residence 	address
(place 	of 	domicile) 	is 	required 	by 	pre-
senting 	two 	documents 	from 	the 	list 	be-
low. 	All 	documents 	presented 	for 	satis-
factory 	proof 	of 	resident 	address 	must
be 	the 	most 	currently 	issued 	document.
Acceptable documents for proof of
address are:
• Most current government issued property tax
statement
• Current mortgage/lease/rental document
• Current homeowners/renter’s insurance pol-
icy
• Current utility bill (electricity, gas, water, sew-
er, cable, recycle)
• School/College Transcript 	issued 	within 	6
months
• Current financial statement (issued by finan-
cial institution, government entity, govern-
ment regulated entity)
• Current pay stub or statement from employer
• Current vehicle insurance policy/statement
• Non-expired current resident certificate or
identification card with physical address is-
sued by a North Dakota Tribal Agency
• Current formal resident statement issued by
property owner/renter
• Current Relief Agency or Shelter Certification
All documents must contain your name and
physical residence address. Post Office boxes
are NOT acceptable for residence address.
EXAMINATIONS
You must make an appointment to visit one
of the Driver License offices, or you may
take 	your 	knowledge 	test 	immediately 	at
nd.knowtodrive.com.
Cooperation With the Examiner
• The applicant must at all times cooperate
with the examiners by following their in-
structions.
• License applicants must furnish their own
vehicle for the road test. The vehicle equip-
ment will be inspected. All equipment must
be in good working order and display current
registration.
• Pets (except medical alert/service animals),
passengers, and electronic devices will not
be allowed in the vehicle during the road
test.
• In order to pass, you must: follow instruc-
tions, keep in the proper lane, give the proper
signals, parallel park your vehicle, demon-
strate good driving posture, and obey all
traffic signs and traffic laws. If you fail any
of the tests, you will not be allowed to retake
the examination the same day.
• All applicants less than 16 years of age must
be accompanied by one of their parents or
a legal guardian when they appear before
the examiner for the road test. The parent
or legal guardian will be required to sign an
authorization stating the need for the child

-- 9 of 56 --

6
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	Revised 2 023
to operate a vehicle without being accom-
panied by an adult.
• If you are 14 or 15 years old, you may be
issued a permit to operate your parent’s,
guardian’s, grandparent’s, sibling’s, aunt’s
or uncle’s Class D noncommercial vehicle.
You may operate a vehicle that is not your
parent’s or guardian’s to take the road test.
You must present a driver education Cer-
tificate of Training when you report for the
road test. To obtain the certificate, you must
complete 30 hours of classroom and six
hours of behind-the-wheel training through
the Department of Public Instruction or com-
plete six hours of behind-the-wheel training
through a commercial driver training school
approved by the North Dakota Department
of Transportation. Go to www.dot.nd.gov for
a list of approved driving schools.
See page 4 Road Test Waiver for Certificate
of Course Completion and Student Comple-
tion Certificate requirements.
ORGAN, TISSUE, AND EYE DONATION
Thousands of people are waiting for a lifesav-
ing or life enhancing organ, tissue or cornea
transplant. Licensed drivers, or those at least
14 years of age and applying for their driver li-
cense permit in the state of North Dakota, can
make a personal commitment to organ, tissue
and eye donation by checking the “Yes” box
on the application form. You may also register
online at www.dot.nd.gov. This donor indica-
tion serves as your consent. It is important to
discuss your decision with your family mem-
bers and make them aware of your wishes.
Organs and tissues that can be donated in-
clude heart, lungs, liver, kidney, pancreas,
intestines, skin, heart valves, bone, and ten-
dons and ligaments. Organs are allocated
to recipients based upon medical urgency,
length of time waiting, genetic matching, and
geography.
Anyone can be a donor, regardless of age and
health conditions. The donation process does
not prevent an open-casket funeral. Donors
are treated with great care and dignity and
there is no charge for donation to the donor’s
family. If you are under the age of 18, your
parents will be asked to affirm your decision.
For more information about organ, tissue, and
eye donation, contact LifeSource at 1-888-
536-6283 or visit www.DonateLifeND.org
MINORS DRIVER LICENSE
1. Upon successful completion of the road
test, a 15 year old will be issued a restricted
Class D operator’s license. While in pos-
session of a restricted Class D operator’s
license, the driver is restricted to operating
his or her parent’s, guardian’s, grandpar-
ent’s, sibling’s, aunt’s or uncle’s vehicles.
2. At age 15, when in possession of a re-
stricted Class D operator’s license, the in-
dividual is not allowed to operate a vehicle
without his or her parent, legal guardian, or
an individual at least 18 years of age be-
tween the later of sunset or 9:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. The only exception to this is driv-
ing directly to or from work, an official school
activity or a religious activity.
3. At age 16 the restricted Class D Operator’s
License transitions to an unrestricted license.
4. Anyone, regardless of age who is operat-
ing a vehicle with an instruction permit and
licensed drivers under the age of 18 are
prohibited from using electronic communi-
cation devices while driving. This includes
a device to talk, compose, read or send
electronic messages. The only exception
is to obtain emergency assistance, to pre-
vent a crime that appears about to be com-
mitted, or in the reasonable belief that an
individual’s life or safety is in danger.
5. The director shall cancel the permit or li-
cense of a minor under 18 years of age
who accumulates six or more points on
their driving record or commits an alcohol-
related offense or a drug related offense
while operating a motor vehicle. This in-
cludes minor in possession or minor in
consumption of alcoholic beverage.
6. A minor, under 18, whose permit or license
has been cancelled in this manner will be
considered as never having had a permit

-- 10 of 56 --

7
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
or license before. An Instruction permit
will be issued after successful completion
of the knowledge and vision tests. A road
test will be administered after successful
completion of driver’s education and the
required holding period of the permit (see
page 1). In the event of a cancellation,
driver’s education requirements may be
met by completing 30 hours of classroom
and six hours of behind-the-wheel training
through the Department of Public Instruc-
tion or six hours of behind-the-wheel train-
ing through a commercial driver training
school approved by the North Dakota De-
partment of Transportation or by complet-
ing an approved Internet driver education
course and 30 hours of driving supervised
by a parent or legal guardian.
7. The points total does not automatically go
back to zero when the cancellation re-
quirements are fulfilled. See page 39 for
point reduction.
RESTRICTIONS
Depending upon your particular capabilities
as a driver, your permit or license may be re-
stricted.
Standard Restrictions:
1 Corrective Lenses
2 Outside Mirrors
3 Automatic Transmission
4 Special Hand Controls
5 Daylight Driving Only
6 Proof of Financial Responsibility
9 Other (explanation of restriction will be
printed on reverse side of permit or license)
If you permanently lose the use of a hand,
arm, foot, leg, or eye, you must report it to:
Driver License Division, North Dakota Depart-
ment of Transportation, 608 East Boulevard
Avenue, Bismarck, North Dakota 58505-0750
(NDCC 39-06-14).
RENEWALS
You may be eligible to renew your license on-
line. 	To determine your eligibility please visit
www.dot.nd.gov.	www.dot.nd.gov.
Your present license is valid for a certain peri-
od of time depending on the date on which you
apply. The license expires on midnight of your
birthday or the “duration of stay” date if an im-
migration document is presented for proof of
identity, not to exceed the usual licensing cy-
cle period. You may renew your license 10
months prior to expiration without losing
any time remaining on the old license.
All renewal applicants must submit to a vision
test at the time of renewal or present a cer-
tificate of vision obtained from a physician or
optometrist. The certificate must not be more
than six months old.
For more information, contact any driver’s
license office or the Driver License Division,
North Dakota Department of Transportation,
608 East Boulevard Avenue, Bismarck, North
Dakota 58505-0750.
DUPLICATE LICENSES/PERMITS
You must apply for a duplicate operator’s license
or permit if your license or permit is lost, contains
any wrong information, or is mutilated so that it
cannot be read. This is done by visiting a driver’s
license office. You must present proof of identity
and documentary evidence for a name or date of
birth change such as a certified or amended birth
certificate, certified marriage certificate, divorce
decree, or legal name change through the court.
You may be eligible for an online duplicate li-
cense. To determine your eligibility please visit
www.dot.nd.gov.
CHANGE OF NAME OR ADDRESS
If you change your name or address, you
must notify the Driver License Division within
10 days. You must provide documentary evi-
dence of the change. Please visit our web-
site at www.dot.nd.gov for a list of acceptable
documents.

-- 11 of 56 --

8
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	Revised 2 023
REGISTERING YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE
North Dakota law requires that a motor ve-
hicle be registered immediately in North Da-
kota, when the owner or operator becomes
a resident of the state or becomes gainfully
employed in this state.
Two registration options are available:
1. Obtain a North Dakota title and purchase
a vehicle license valid through the end of
the 	registration 	period. 	We 	recommend
this option if your present registration will
expire during the time you expect to be in
North Dakota. All vehicles must have liabil-
ity insurance. Vehicle owners shall not per-
mit a vehicle to be driven without a policy of
liability insurance. As a driver, you should
be sure that the vehicle you are driving is
properly insured.
2. Purchase a temporary registration permit
if the vehicle license from another state is
still current and if you plan to be in North
Dakota only a short time. The permits are
available for six months or 12 months; a
$10 service fee is charged in addition to
the registration fee each time a permit is
purchased or renewed. The vehicle regis-
tration card must be carried in the vehicle
at all times.
Contact the NDDOT Motor Vehicle Division at
(701) 328-2725 for all vehicle questions.
CLASSES OF LICENSES
North Dakota has five classes of operator’s
licenses. Each class requires its own written
exam and a demonstration of driving skill for
that class of license. This manual prepares
you for the Class D License only.
Class A: Any combination of vehicles with a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross
vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more,
whichever is greater, provided the vehicle be-
ing towed has a GVWR or gross vehicle weight
of 10,001 pounds or more, whichever is great-
er. (May also operate Class B, C, and D vehicle
groups, but not a Class M, unless endorsed.)
Class B: Any single vehicle with a GVWR or
gross vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more,
whichever is greater. May tow a vehicle not in
excess of 10,000 pounds. (May also operate
Class C and D vehicle groups, but not Class M,
unless endorsed.)
Class C: Any single vehicle with a GVWR
of 26,000 pounds or less that is designed to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the
driver or is transporting hazardous materials
under 49 CFR Part 172 (placarded material)
and 42 CFR part 73. May tow a vehicle not in
excess of 10,000 pounds. (May also operated
a Class D vehicle, but not a Class M, unless
endorsed).
Class D: Any single vehicle less than 26,001
pounds GVWR may tow trailers not over 10,000
pounds GVWR.
NOTE: Must be 18 years of age or under farm
exemption if combined weight exceeds 26,000
pounds. Trucks towing trailers over 10,000
pounds, provided the combined weight does
not exceed 26,000 gross combination weight
rating. Not valid for Class A, B, C, or M, unless
endorsed.
An emergency vehicle, RV, camper, vehicle
driven by active duty member for military pur-
poses, or a vehicle towing a travel trailer be-
ing used solely for personal purposes may be
driven with a Class D license.
The following may also be operated on a Class
D License (farm exemption):
1. Age 15 may drive a farm vehicle within 150
miles of driver’s farm, having a gross weight
of not more than 50,000 pounds, when
transporting agricultural products or farm
supplies.
2. Any two-axle, tandem axle, or triple axle, or
truck-tractor farm vehicle controlled and op-
erated by a farmer transporting agricultural
products, farm machines, or farm supplies
to or from a farm within 150 miles of the per-
son’s farm. Farm vehicle may tow a trailer,
semi-trailer, or farm trailer except double or
triple trailers, or if under 18 years of age, a
truck-tractor.
3. Any farm vehicle operated by a farmer may

-- 12 of 56 --

9
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	 	R	 	evised 2 023
transport 	hazardous 	material 	within 	150
miles of the farm without a hazardous mate-
rial endorsement on the operator’s license.
4. Covered Farm Vehicles may also be oper-
ated on a Class D License. These are ve-
hicles used for farm or ranch purposes that
display either farm registration plates or
are identified by a designation that clear-
ly identifies the vehicle as a farm vehicle
(in North Dakota, form SFN 60860 avail-
able on our website at www.dot.nd.gov).
A covered farm vehicle with a Gross Ve-
hicle 	Weight 	(GVW) 	or 	Gross 	Vehicle
Weight 	Rating 	(GVWR), 	whichever 	is
greater, of 26,001 pounds or less may be
operated anywhere in the United States.
A covered farm vehicle with a GVW or
GVWR, whichever is greater, of more than
26,001 pounds may be operated within the
state where it is registered, or if travelling
outside of the state, within 150 air miles of
the owner or operator’s farm or ranch.
Class M: Any two- or three-wheeled motor-
cycle.
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND ROAD
MARKINGS
SIGNS
We use three basic kinds of signs on our
streets 	and 	highways: 	Regulatory 	signs,
Warning signs, and Guide signs. Some, but
not all, of the signs you will see are shown
here.
REGULATORY SIGNS
Regulatory signs control and regulate traffic.
They give mandatory instructions to the driver.
Most are white with black letters or red with
white letters.
The Stop sign is the only eight-
sided sign. The Stop sign tells
you that you must come to a
complete stop before the stop
line or crosswalk area. If there
is no stop line or crosswalk,
stop as near as possible be-
fore the intersection where you
can safely see traffic approach-
ing from all directions.
The Yield sign means that you
must yield the right of way.
The 	sign 	tells 	you 	to 	slow
down and stop if necessary so
you can yield the right of way.
The Speed Limit sign is an ex-
ample 	of 	a 	regulatory 	sign
showing the maximum speed
permitted 	under 	ideal 	condi-
tions. These signs will normally
be found on the right-hand side
of streets and highways.
The One Way sign tells you that
traffic on that particular road
flows in the direction of the ar-
row only.

-- 13 of 56 --

10
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
The 	Wrong 	Way 	sign
tells you that you are go-
ing the wrong way on a
street, freeway, or ramp.
The Do Not Enter sign pro-
hibits the driver from enter-
ing a restricted road section.
Some regulatory signs prohibit certain ac-
tions. These signs are square with black let-
tering on a white background. A red circle with
a red slash indicates the action that is forbid-
den. (Above signs are: No U-turn, No right
turn, No trucks, No left turn.)
Some states use the yellow pennant-shaped
warning sign in addition to the rectangle “Do
Not Pass.” The rectangular “Do Not Pass”
sign is placed on the right side of the road
while the pennant-shaped sign is found on
the left-hand side.
This 	sign 	prohibits 	a 	right
turn on a red light at selected
intersections. 	Some 	inter-
sections 	display 	this 	sign
electronically.
Two-way Left Turn Only signs
are used when a lane in the
center of the roadway is to be
used only by left turning ve-
hicles in either direction. The
center lane is not intended to
be used for passing 	or over-
taking.
These signs tell you how to interpret traffic
signals when you want to make a left turn.
Pay close attention to the message on each
one to make the turn safely.

-- 14 of 56 --

11
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
WARNING SIGNS
Warning signs are used to warn you of poten-
tially hazardous conditions ahead so that you
will proceed with extra caution. These signs
are yellow with a black legend.
These warning signs indicate curves or turns
in the road. They give you time to reduce your
speed before you enter the curve or turn.
They are often supplemented with an advi-
sory speed sign showing the maximum rec-
ommended speed to negotiate the curve or
turn.
These signs warn you of a reduction in the
number of traffic lanes ahead. Be sure to
move safely into the proper lane.
Merge left.
The roadway will gain an ad-
ditional lane of traffic. New
traffic will not have to merge.
The median or divided high-
way ends.
The median or divided high-
way begins and the traffic is
separated.
The road has two-way traffic.
Traffic may be moving into your
lane from the right side.
These warning signs indicate intersections on
the road. Be aware of vehicles entering the
flow of traffic.

-- 15 of 56 --

12
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
The Railroad Advance
Warning sign is round with
black lettering on a yellow
background. The sign in-
dicates that you are near-
ing a railroad crossing.
You should slow down so
that you can safely stop if
a train is coming.
Slow-moving vehicle signs are shaped
like a triangle. They are
orange with a red, reflec-
tive border. This sign is
mounted on the rear of
vehicles or equipment be-
ing towed at a speed of
25 miles per hour or less.
Slow down and use cau-
tion.
Pedestrian Signs
May be fluorescent yellow-green or standard
yellow in color.
Watch out for pedestrians crossing the road.
(Pedestrian crosswalk.)
School Signs
May be fluorescent yellow-green or standard
yellow in color.
This sign tells you a school or a marked
school crossing is ahead. (School ahead.)
This sign warns you of a crosswalk for school
children. (School crosswalk.
Special Warning Signs
or
or
Yield Ahead 	Bump in the road
ahead. Slow down
to avoid loss of
control.
Traffic Signal Ahead 	Deer Crossing
Watch for bicyclists
when you see this
sign.
Slow down because
this road is slippery
when wet.

-- 16 of 56 --

13
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
CHANNELIZING DEVICES
Barricades, 	vertical 	panels, 	drums, 	cones,
and tubes are the most commonly used de-
vices to alert drivers of conditions in highway
and street work areas and to guide drivers
safely through the work zone.
The diagonal stripes on the barricade or verti-
cal panel guide the driver towards the direc-
tion to which traffic is to pass. Stripes sloping
downward to the right mean the driver should-
keep to the right. Conversely, stripes sloping
downward to the left mean keep to the left.
FLASHING ARROW PANELS
Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels
may be used in work zones both day and
night to direct drivers into certain traffic lanes
and to inform them that part of the road or
street ahead of them is closed. The arrow
panel may also be used in a caution mode.
Pass to the Left
Pass to the Right
Barricade
Panel
Guide 	Guide
Caution
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
DEVICES
Special signs and traffic control devices are
used in highway work zones. Most signs in
work areas are diamond shaped. A few signs
are rectangular. These signs are orange with
a black legend. You may also see electronic
signs that display changing messages. Slow
down through construction and maintenance
zones! 	Failure 	to 	comply 	with 	work 	zone
speed limits carries an $80 minimum fee
when work is in progress and workers are
present.

-- 17 of 56 --

14
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
FLAGPERSONS
Flagpersons are often provided in highway
and street work zones to stop, slow, or guide
traffic safely through the area. Flagpersons
wear orange, yellow, strong yellow-green, or
fluorescent vests, shirts, or jackets and use
red flags or stop/slow paddles to direct traffic
through work zones.
WORK ZONE SAFETY TIPS
• Pay attention. Work Zones contain many
hazards such as uneven pavement, narrow
lanes, heavy equipment, and loose gravel.
• Slow down. Most crashes in the summer
months are related to excessive speeds.
Remember, workers are just inches away
from traffic.
• Watch for signs. Over 25,000 serious in-
juries occur nationally in work zones each
year. See Orange signs.
• 98 percent of Work Zone fatalities are trav-
elers. Motorists and passengers suffer most
of the traffic casualties in work zones.
• Work Zones can appear at any time of day.
Road crews work both night and day. Watch
where you are going, especially at night.
GUIDE SIGNS
Guide signs provide information about direc-
tions, distances, available services, points of
interest, and other geographical, recreational,
or cultural information.
Guide signs are rectangular in shape, though
their colors vary according to their message.
Signs which give direction are
rectangular in shape. The let-
ters are white on a green back-
ground. These signs give infor-
mation 	about 	the 	direction 	of
and distance to your destination.
They 	give 	information 	about
junctions and routes as well.
Milepost 	signs 	are 	long 	rect-
angles. The letters are white on
a green background. The num-
bers on these signs tell you how
many miles you are from the
south or west border of the state
or origin of the route within the
state.
Service signs are rectangular. The symbols
are white on a blue background.
This is a special sign. The sym-
bol of access sign indicates that
facilities such as rest areas are
free of barriers to people with
mobility impairments.
Hospital 	Telephone
Gas

-- 18 of 56 --

15
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
A green arrow means you
may enter the intersection to
make the movement indicat-
ed by the arrow. If the green
arrow comes on at a red light,
you may turn in the direction
of the arrow. You must yield
the right of way to all pedes-
trians and vehicles already in
the intersection.
Note: You may turn right on a red light af-
ter stopping when the intersection is clear of
both pedestrians and vehicles, unless there
is a sign prohibiting a right turn on a red light.
You may turn left on a red light from a one-
way street onto a one-way street, unless there
is a sign prohibiting this. If the traffic signals
are dark, for example in the event of a power
outage, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and
yield the right of way to any vehicle in the in-
tersection.
Flashing Indications
Some traffic signals are operated like flashing
beacons late at night or when traffic volumes
are light.
Flashing 	red 	means 	the 	same
thing as a stop sign—STOP. Pro-
ceed when the intersection is clear
of pedestrians and vehicles.
Flashing yellow at an intersection
means proceed with CAUTION.Left
Recreational area signs are rectangular. The
symbols are white on a brown background.
SIGNALS
Traffic Signals
Like signs, traffic signals can do their job only
if everyone follows the rules.
A 	red 	indication 	means
STOP. As with the stop sign,
you must stop at a marked
stop line or before a cross-
walk. Remain stopped until
the light changes and the in-
tersection is clear of pedes-
trians and vehicles.
A 	yellow 	indication 	means
WARNING 	or 	CAUTION.
The light is changing from
green to red.
Green means GO—but only
if the intersection is clear.

-- 19 of 56 --

16
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
Turn Indications
Steady Red
Steady Yellow
Flashing Yellow
Steady Green
What Drivers Should Know
STOP. Left-turning drivers must
stop and wait.
WARNING CAUTION. The left turn
signal is changing to red.
CAUTION. 	You 	may 	cautiously
turn left after yielding to oncom-
ing traffic and to pedestrians. On-
coming traffic will typically have a
green light.
GO. Left-turning drivers have the
right-of-way.
PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Pavement markings are like traffic signs and
signals. They direct and control the smooth
and orderly movement of traffic.
Broken yellow center lines are
used 	on 	two-lane, 	two-way
roads. You may cross them
only to turn left or to pass an-
other vehicle.
One solid line with one broken
line means no passing when
you are in the lane with the
solid line. The solid line may be
crossed only to turn left.
Two solid yellow lines on a
two-lane road means no pass-
ing in either direction. Cross-
ing the centerline is permitted
only as part of a left-turn ma-
neuver.
Undivided Roadway
Multi-lane, two-way road-
way, crossing the center-
line is permitted only as
part of a left-turn maneu-
ver.

-- 20 of 56 --

17
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
Divided Roadways
This is a multi-lane roadway
with a divider separating the
traffic flow.
Two-Way Left Turn Lane
The 	center 	lane 	is 	re-
served only for left-turning
vehicles in either direc-
tion. Passing or overtak-
ing is not permitted in the
center lane. 	At many busy intersections there are specially
designated left- and right-turn lanes. If you
wish to turn left, you must use the special left-
turn lane. If you wish to turn right, you must
use the special right-turn lane. Some inter-
sections have more than one turn lane.
STOP LINES are wide, white
lines that show you where to
stop your vehicle before enter-
ing an intersection.
When stop lines and cross-
walk lines are used together,
you must stop your vehicle
before crossing the stop line.
UNMARKED CROSSWALK:
Where there are no lines at
an 	intersection, 	you 	must
stop your vehicle before en-
tering the crosswalk (side-
walk area) or, if there is no
crosswalk, 	you 	must 	stop
before your vehicle enters
the intersection.
CROSSWALK LINES are a
pair of white lines or longitu-
dinal lines that mark where
pedestrians 	will 	walk. 	Do
not block the crosswalk with
your vehicle.
STOP INTERSECTIONS
At an intersection where a stop is required, you must follow these pavement markings—

-- 21 of 56 --

18
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
not cross the tracks when the red lights are
flashing. And never drive around the gates
when they are down.
School buses, vehicles carrying explosives
or flammable liquids such as gasoline trucks,
and buses carrying passengers must stop
at railroad crossings. These vehicles must
stop within 50 feet and not less than 15 feet
from the tracks. Watch out for them and do
not pass them when they are stopped at the
crossing. Remember, railroad crossings are
always dangerous. Every crossing must be
approached with the expectation that a train
is coming.
TYPES OF CROSSINGS
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing
does not have any type of traffic control de-
vice. The decision to stop or proceed rests
entirely in your hands. Passive crossing re-
quire you to recognize the crossing, search
for any train using the tracks and decide if
there is sufficient clear space to cross safe-
ly. Passive crossings have a yellow circular
advance warning signs, pavement markings
and crossbuck to assist you in recognizing a
crossing.
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a
traffic control device installed at the crossing
to regulate traffic at the crossing. These ac-
tive devices include flashing red lights, with or
without bells and flashing red lights with bells
and gates.
Emergency 	Notification 	System 	(ENS).
The Federal Railroad Administration posts
emergency phone numbers on railroad cross-
ing posts or the metal control boxes near the
tracks. Call this number if you see an obstruc-
tion on the railroad tracks or any other prob-
lems at a railroad crossing such as the lights
or gates are not working properly. Current
ENS phone numbers are:
Amtrak 	1-800-331-0008
BNSF Railway 	1-800-832-5452
Canadian Pacific 	1-800-716-9132
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
Railroad crossings can be marked with sev-
eral different types of devices: warning signs,
pavement markings, crossbucks, and signal
lights. Some railroad crossings are marked
by all four of these devices, and some cross-
ings are marked by only one or a combination
of devices.
Watch for these warning devices. And when
you see them, look, listen, and slow down.
You may have to stop.
These 	advance-warning 	signs
warn you that a railroad crossing
is ahead. Begin to slow down and
be prepared to stop.
This is a crossbuck. It is found
at railroad crossings. If there is
more than one track, the sign
below tells you the number of
tracks. Make sure all the tracks
are clear and no trains are ap-
proaching before you cross. For
safety, 	never 	stop 	or 	park 	on
railroad tracks for any reason. If
a stop is required, make sure you stop your
vehicle prior to the railroad crossing. When
approching multiple tracks please remember
that an additional train can be approaching
from the opposite direction that the previous
train has cleared.
If your vehicle is trapped or stuck on the
tracks, evacuate your vehicle and walk in the
direction of the oncoming train and away from
the tracks at a 45 dregree angle. If your vehi-
cle is struck by a moving train, the debris will
spread out from the tracks in the same direc-
tion the train is moving. Then call the “Emer-
cency Notification System (ENS) number to
report the emergency and then call 911.
Pavement 	markings 	may
be 	used 	with 	the 	cross-
buck at railroad crossings.
When a train is crossing,
stop at least 15 feet be-
fore the crossing. At some
crossings, gates and red
flashing lights are used. Do

-- 22 of 56 --

19
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
it is recommended to look first to your left,
then to your right and then left again. Be
prepared to yield.
• At an uncontrolled T-intersection, the ve-
hicle on the terminating street must yield to
vehicles on the continuing street.
• Vehicles turning left
must yield to oncom-
ing traffic. Watch for
vehicles passing on
the 	right 	side 	of 	a
vehicle 	turning 	left.
• At a four-way stop,
the vehicle that stops
first goes first. If one
vehicle goes out of
turn, yield to that ve-
hicle so that you do
not 	cause 	a 	crash.
• Pedestrians in marked or unmarked cross-
walks have the right of way. Drivers must
yield when pedestrians are in the driver’s
lane of travel.
• Pedestrians carrying white canes or with
guide dogs are blind or have greatly re-
duced vision. Just as in other pedestrian
situations, motorists are required to yield
or stop for anyone who may have begun
crossing a street. When stopping at an in-
tersection, be sure to stop behind the cross-
walk to allow the visually-impaired traveler
an unobstructed path. At times the person
who is blind may choose to wait for optimal
traffic conditions. The key to safety is based
on careful observance of the pedestrian and
common courtesy. Motorists and pedestri-
ans should not distract a guide dog in any
way. These friendly, intelligent dogs must
ENS Sign Sample
HAND SIGNALS
Even though vehicles are equipped with elec-
trical turn and brake lights, you should know
the basic hand signals as well. All turn signals
of intention to turn must be given continuous-
ly during the last 100 feet before the turn. Mo-
torists must also be able to recognize hand
signals given by motorcyclists and bicyclists
and give them sufficient space to execute
their signaled maneuvers as they would an-
other vehicle.
RULES OF THE ROAD
RIGHT OF WAY
Right-of-way rules are a means of establish-
ing orderly traffic movement. If everyone fol-
lows these rules, crashes can be reduced.
Unfortunately, there are many operators who
ignore the rules. For this reason, you must
drive defensively. Always be ready to yield to
those who do not follow the right-of-way rules.
• When two vehicles
approach 	an 	un-
signed intersection
at 	approximately
the same time, the
vehicle on the left
side must yield to
the vehicle on the
right. When enter-
ing an intersection,

-- 23 of 56 --

20
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
focus on the commands of their owner.
• Vehicles entering or crossing a roadway
from a private drive must yield to all oncom-
ing traffic.
• Vehicles emerging from a driveway, alley,
private road, or building within a business
or residential district must come to a com-
plete stop immediately prior to crossing a
sidewalk area and, if no sidewalk, vehicles
must stop before entering the roadway.
• You may not make a U-turn near the crest of
a hill or any curve where the driver cannot
see 500 feet or more.
• Emergency vehicles always have the right
of way.
• When an emergency or law enforcement
vehicle is flashing its red, white, or blue
lights or using its siren, you must immedi-
ately come to a stop along the right-hand
curb or edge of the road. You must remain
stopped until the emergency or law enforce-
ment vehicle has passed. Do not stop in the
middle of the intersection.
• When an emergency or law enforcement
vehicle is parked at the scene of a crash
with its emergency lights flashing, you must
drive to the right-hand side of the roadway
and stop. Once stopped, you may pass at
your risk when the roadway is clear. If there
is a police officer directing traffic at the
scene, you must obey the officer’s instruc-
tions. If an emergency vehicle, law enforce-
ment vehicle, or North Dakota Department
of Transportation maintenance vehicle is
parked on the Interstate system or a multi-
lane highway with its emergency or work
lights flashing, move over to the opposite
lane and proceed with due caution.
• The yellow-flashing light is used mostly on
tow trucks and slow moving vehicles. These
lights warn you to slow down.
• When a school bus is stopped and flashing
its red lights, drivers approaching from both
directions must stop. This is because chil-
dren are being loaded or unloaded. The
drivers cannot proceed until 1) the bus be-
gins moving; or 2) the bus driver signals to
let vehicles pass; or 3) the red lights are
no longer flashing. When a school bus is
equipped with yellow caution lights, these
lights may be used as a warning that the
school bus is about to stop and that the red
flashing lights will soon come on. Be espe-
cially alert every time you see a school bus.
SPEED LIMITS
Speed limits are maximum limits to be trav-
eled only when driving conditions are ideal.
Sometimes conditions may require you to
drive slower than the posted speed limit al-
lows. Never drive faster than the posted speed
limit or conditions allow. Authorities may also
post minimum speed limits if deemed neces-
sary for the safe movement of traffic.
Maximum speed limits in North Dakota have
been established as follows:
• 20 miles per hour when approaching any
railway crossing when your view of the track
is obstructed, unless otherwise posted.
• 20 miles per hour when approaching an in-
tersection when your view of the intersec-
tion is in any way obstructed, unless other-
wise posted.
• 20 miles per hour when you pass by a
school during school recess or while chil-
dren are going to or leaving school during
opening or closing hours of school, unless
otherwise posted.
• 25 miles per hour in a business or residen-
tial district, unless otherwise posted.
• 55 miles per hour on gravel, dirt, or loose
surface roads unless otherwise posted, and
on paved two-lane county and township
highways if there is no speed limit posted.
• 65 miles per hour on rural paved 2-lane
highways if posted for that speed.
• 70 miles per hour on paved and divided
multi-lane highways, unless otherwise posted.
• 75 miles per hour on rural Interstate high-
ways, unless otherwise posted.

-- 24 of 56 --

21
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
PASSING
On two-way roads you must drive on the right-
hand side of the roadway; when you pass you
are driving against the flow of the oncoming
traffic.
Before you pass another vehicle, ask yourself
these questions:
• Is the pass necessary?
• Am I in or approaching a no passing zone?
(Whenever there is a hill or a curve ahead,
you must treat it as if there is oncoming traf-
fic just beyond it.)
• Can I return to my lane before meeting an
approaching vehicle?
• Can I see the road ahead clearly?
Some Guidelines for Passing
• Give yourself enough time to get completely
beyond the vehicle that you are passing,
and return to your proper lane at least 200
feet before meeting an approaching vehicle.
• Do not return to your lane until you can see
the image of the entire front of the vehicle
you passed within the inside rear-view mirror.
• When passing, never leave the main-trav-
eled roadway.
• When being passed, do not speed up.
• Do not follow too closely.
• Obey all regulatory and warning signs.
Never Pass:
• While approaching the top of a hill or a
curve.
• Within 100 feet of an intersection, a railroad
crossing, or a tunnel.
• When you see any pavement marking or-
sign indicating NO PASSING.
• When your view of the road is reduced or
obstructed by fog, snow, or rain.
Many head-on collisions occur while one ve-
hicle is passing another. Even while driving in
the left lane of a four-lane highway, be aware
that you might collide with a vehicle going the
wrong way.
LANE CHANGES
If you must change lanes, make sure the lane
is clear and signal your movement. If possi-
ble, avoid changing lanes within an intersec-
tion. Be sure to keep a safe following distance
(safe space) from the vehicle ahead of you.
Check your mirrors and look over your shoul-
der for vehicles behind you and already in the
other lane. Be aware of “blind spots” or areas
where mirrors fail to pick up approaching traf-
fic. Signal prior to making the lane change.
Change only one lane at a time and be sure
to cancel your signal when you complete the
lane change.
Remember: The driver of the vehicle mak-
ing the lane change is responsible for safely
changing lanes.
FOLLOWING AND STOPPING
DISTANCES
If you drive too fast or follow too close, you
will not have enough time to stop in an emer-
gency. At 55 miles per hour, it takes approxi-
mately 300 feet or one city block on dry pave-
ment to stop.
When one vehicle follows another, there must
be enough distance between them to allow
for a passing vehicle to come into that space
without any danger. If the vehicle in front of

-- 25 of 56 --

22
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
TURNING
When making any turn, you should check
both ways for traffic and pedestrians. You
must also signal continuously for the last 100
feet before the turn.
When approaching an intersection to make a
right turn, stay as far to the right as possible.
Make the turn close to the right curb.
To turn left from a one-way road onto a two-way
road, begin in the left turn lane and complete
the turn as indicated in the picture.
To turn left from a one-way to a one-way, be-
gin the turn from the left lane. Make the turn
close to the left curb.
When turning left from a two-way road onto
a two-way road, begin as close to the cen-
terline as possible and complete the turn as
indicated in the picture.
you suddenly stops, you should be far enough
behind so that you can come to a stop safely.
The “three-second rule” is a way to mea-
sure the distance that you should use as a
cushion when following another vehicle. Here
is how it works:
• Pick a shadow, mark, or object on or near
the road ahead.
• When the rear bumper of the vehicle ahead
of you passes the mark, start counting the
seconds it takes you to reach the same
spot. Count “one-thousand-and-one, one-
thousand-and-two, one-thousand-and-three.”
• If you reach the spot before you count “one-
thousand-and-three,” you are following too
closely.
Sometimes you need even more following
distance, as much as four or more seconds.
This is especially true when:
• The roads are slippery.
• Following motorcycles.
• You have a heavy load or are pulling a trail-
er.
• Following large vehicles that block your
view ahead.
• The driver behind you wants to pass.
• Following drivers whose view to the rear is
blocked.

-- 26 of 56 --

23
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
To turn left from a two-way road onto a one-
way road, approach the turn with your left
wheels close to the centerline of the road.
Make the turn before reaching the center of
the intersection, and enter the left lane of the
one-way road.
To turn left from a two-way road onto a four-
lane highway, approach the turn with your left
wheels close to the centerline of the road.
Make the turn so that you enter the passing
lane of the four-lane highway. When traffic
permits, move to the right, out of the passing
lane.
ROUNDABOUTS
A roundabout is a circular intersection where
vehicles travel around a center island in a
counter-clockwise direction. These intersec-
tions are designed to reduce the number and
severity of collisions, as well as provide oper-
ational efficiencies in the flow of traffic. When
approaching a roundabout, perform the fol-
lowing steps:
1. Reduce your speed.
2. If more than one lane exists, use the left
lane to turn left, the right lane to turn right,
and all lanes to go through unless directed
otherwise by signs and pavement mark-
ings.
3. Yield to pedestrians and bicyclists.
4. Yield to circulating traffic when entering the
roundabout.
5. Stay in your lane within the roundabout and
use your right-turn signal when exiting.
6. Always assume trucks need all available
space—do not pass them!
7. Clear the roundabout to allow emergen-
cy vehicles to pass and do not enter the
roundabout if one is approaching.
8. Signal when you are changing direction to
exit the roundabout.
Large Vehicles
Roundabouts are designed to accommodate
all vehicle types, including truck and trailer
combinations. To assist large trucks, the cen-
ter island includes an apron to accommodate
the rear wheels of the vehicle.
INTERSTATE DRIVING
Speeds are higher on the Interstate than on
city streets. Because of this, your vehicle will
travel further during your reaction time. To
drive safely on the Interstate, you should:

-- 27 of 56 --

24
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
• Be alert. Use your mirrors so that you know
what is behind you as well as what is in
front of you.
• When changing lanes, use your turn sig-
nals and make sure the lane is clear. When
passing, do not cut back into the right lane
too quickly.
• Keep to the right if you are traveling slowly.
• Never stop on the traveled part of the road-
way. In an emergency, stop on the shoulder,
and raise your hood to show difficulty.
• Avoid driving when you are tired.
• Dim your lights when following another ve-
hicle.
INTERCHANGES
Different states use different names for the
ramps used for getting on and off the inter-
state highway. For convenience, we call them
interchanges. The two most common types of
interchanges are the diamond and the clover-
leaf.
For all interchanges, you must remember:
• Highway guide signs tell you the location
of interchanges well in advance. Watch for
these signs. Move into the proper lane be-
fore you reach your interchange.
• Never back up on the Interstate. If you miss
your interchange, go on to the next one. Do
not use median crossovers. These are for
authorized vehicles only such as emergency
and maintenance vehicles.
• Never back up on a ramp. If you exit at the
wrong interchange, you must follow it out.
Return to the highway by the “on” ramp.
Entrance 	ramps 	allow 	you 	to 	adjust 	your
speed to merge safely with the flow of traf-
fic on the highway. Stopping on these ramps
should be avoided. Only stop when there is
no opening in the traffic flow.
Unless posted signs indicate otherwise, any
vehicle entering a freeway from an entrance
ramp must yield the right of way to vehicles
on the main roadway.
Exit ramps are for leaving or exiting from the
highway. You should never stop or back up on
these ramps.
NIGHT DRIVING
Night driving tends to be more difficult than
daytime driving. You can only see as far as
your headlights, and this cuts down on your
time to react. Be mindful not to overdrive your
headlights. You should:
• Use your headlights from sunset to sunrise,
and at any other time necessary for safe driv-
ing.
• Use your headlights during inclement weath-
er when visibility is less than 1,000 feet due
to rain, snow, sleet, hail, smoke, or fog.
• Slow down. You should be able to stop in the
distance covered by your headlights even if
you come up on a vehicle without taillights,
or a parked vehicle with its lights on.
• Clean your windshield inside and out; this
will reduce the amount of glare from oncom-
ing vehicles. Clean the headlights on your
vehicle; this will naturally give more light

-- 28 of 56 --

25
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
PARKING
Parking on a Hill
Parallel Parking
When 	parallel 	parking 	your 	vehicle, 	your
wheels should be parallel to the right-hand
curb and within one foot of the right-hand curb.
Here are some parallel parking hints:
1. Signal your move-
ment and stop even
with the vehicle
ahead and about two
feet away from it.
2. Turn your wheel to
the right and back
slowly toward the
vehicle behind.
3. When clear of the
vehicle ahead, turn
your wheel to the
left and back slowly
toward the
vehicle behind you.
4. Turn your wheel to
the right and pull
ahead toward the
curb. Stop in the
center of the park-
ing space. Put your
vehicle in park.
DOWNHILL
TURN WHEELS
TOWARD CURB
UPHILL
TURN WHEELS
AWAY FROM
CURB
UPHILL NO CURB
TURN WHEELS
TOWARD SHOULDER
and help you see vehicles and other night
hazards better.
• Eyestrain, fatigue, and lack of concentration
can be the result of staring at the spot creat-
ed by your headlights. Keep your eyes mov-
ing, especially at night. Scan for animals,
pedestrians, and bicycle riders. Pay close
attention at dawn and dusk for animals, es-
pecially for deer. Drive at slower speeds in
areas where deer crossing signs are posted.
Do not swerve to avoid an animal because
this could result in a more serious crash like
hitting a tree or another vehicle, or possi-
bly rolling over. Check to the sides for lights
from other vehicles that might be crossing
or entering the roadway ahead of you. Con-
stantly check the taillights of vehicles ahead
for any indication that they are changing
speed or lane position.
• Dim your headlights at least 500 feet before
meeting traffic and within 300 feet when fol-
lowing another vehicle. If you meet a vehicle
that does not dim its lights, look to the right
edge of the road to avoid being blinded. Re-
member, it takes time for your eyes to ad-
just after meeting a vehicle at night.
• Watch carefully for pedestrians. They may
be wearing dark clothing and be difficult to
see.
• Stop and rest if you are tired.
YOUR BRIGHT LIGHTS COULD
BLIND AN APPROACHING DRIVER

-- 29 of 56 --

26
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
Leaving a Parking Space
When you leave a parking space:
1. Look to the rear over your shoulder as well as
in the rear-view mirror.
2. Signal before you start to move.
3. Yield the right of way to oncoming vehicles.
4. Enter traffic in the nearest lane, and remain
in that lane until safe to change to another
lane.
Emergency Parking
When you have to make an emergency stop,
park with all four wheels off the traveled pave-
ment, if possible.
Between one-half hour after sunset and one-
half hour before sunrise, your vehicle must
display at least one white or amber lamp in
front and a red light on the rear, both visible
for a distance of 1,000 feet when parked on a
public highway.
Do Not Park:
• On a sidewalk or in front of a driveway.
• On or within 10 feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection.
• Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
• Within an intersection.
• On the street side of a parked vehicle. This
violation is called double parking.
• On a bridge, overpass, or in a tunnel or un-
derpass.
• Within 15 feet of a flashing beacon, a stop
sign, or a traffic control signal placed on the
side of the roadway.
• Between a safety zone and the curb next
to it or within 15 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone. Safety zones are marked areas set
aside for pedestrians.
• Alongside 	or 	opposite 	street 	excavation
when parking would obstruct traffic.
• Anywhere there is an official “No Parking”
sign.
• In a designated Accessible Parking space
unless 	in 	possession 	of 	the 	appropriate
placard or ‘Accessible’ license plate. Do not
park on the diagonal lines next to the space.
TOWING
Whether you are towing a camping trailer, a
utility trailer, or a boat trailer, the increased
weight from the trailer will lengthen the dis-
tance necessary to stop your vehicle.
• When traveling faster than 25 miles per
hour, you need safety chains or brakes ca-
pable of holding the trailer if the coupling
breaks.
• You need turn signals, stop lights, two red
reflectors, and two red taillights mounted on
the rear of the trailer and visible for a dis-
tance of 1,000 feet. For more details, see
the Motor Vehicle Registrar, North Dakota
Department 	of 	Transportation, 	608 	East
Boulevard Avenue, Bismarck, North Dakota
58505-0700, phone 328-2725.
• You need two amber clearance lamps on
the front and two red clearance lights on the
back of your trailer if it is 80 inches or more
in width.
• Every vehicle must have a mirror allowing
you to see at least 200 feet to the rear.
• If you are towing another vehicle, the draw-
bar or connection between any two vehi-
cles, one of which is towing or drawing the
others on a highway, shall be of such de-
sign, strength, and construction to prevent
the unintentional uncoupling of the vehicles.
• For your safety, it is better to slow down
when you are towing a trailer in a strong
wind.
COASTING PROHIBITED
• The driver of any motor vehicle, when travel-
ing upon a downgrade, may not coast with the
gears or transmission of such vehicle in neutral.
• The driver of a truck or bus, when traveling upon

-- 30 of 56 --

27
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
a downgrade, may not coast with the clutch
disengaged.
BACKING
When backing your vehicle is necessary, it
must be done without interfering with other
traffic. You are responsible for backing onto a
lane of traffic safely.
You must also be careful so that you do not
back into children or other obstacles. To be
safe, before backing you should walk around
your vehicle to check for clearance.
LITTERING
If you throw or deposit any litter on any public
highway, you are subject to a $500 fine.
CRASH REPORTS
If you are involved in a crash that results in
the combined damage of $4,000 or more, or
results in personal injury or death, you must:
• Immediately report it to the local police if
you are in a city.
• Immediately report it to the Highway Patrol
or the County Sheriff’s Office if you are out-
side city limits.
In all crashes involving injury or damage, the
drivers must exchange the following informa-
tion: driver’s name, address, motor vehicle in-
surance company, and policy number.
Whenever the driver is physically incapable
of giving notice of a crash and also is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the
vehicle involved shall, within five days after
learning of the crash, give notice and insur-
ance information not given by the driver.
Any driver who hits an unattended vehicle
must immediately locate and notify the own-
er. If the owner cannot be found, the driver
must leave a note at a conspicuous place on
the unattended vehicle. The note must list the
driver’s name, address, and motor vehicle in-
surance company.
LIABILITY INSURANCE
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in the
state of North Dakota without a valid policy of
liability insurance in effect. The name of the
motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the
policy number of the driver must be furnished
to a law enforcement officer upon request. The
fine for operating an uninsured motor vehicle
is $150 for a first violation and $300 for a sec-
ond or subsequent violation in three years and
may result in a license suspension. If a person
is convicted of “No Liability Insurance,” that
person will be required to provide proof of li-
ability insurance to the division for one year.
The person will also be required to purchase
a duplicate driver’s license with the “Proof of
Liability Insurance” restriction. The cost of this
duplicate license is $50. There will also be a
cost of $50 to have the restriction removed at
the end of the one-year period.
FOR EMERGENCY HIGHWAY ASSISTANCE
DIAL 911
FOR WEATHER AND ROAD CONDITIONS
DIAL 511
DRIVING SKILLS AND EMERGENCY
SITUATIONS
Whenever you drive you must be alert. Al-
ways watch for and be prepared to react to
a possible emergency situation. As a driver,
there will be situations when you will need to
reduce your speed immediately—sometimes
to regain control of your vehicle and other
times to come to a complete stop.
Remember: Brakes work best just before your
tires start to skid or slide on the road surface.
WINTER DRIVING
Winter driving can create hazardous driving
conditions. The driver must be prepared for
these conditions, and follow additional safe
driving practices.
• It is not legal to enter a road that is officially
closed due to hazardous conditions. The
penalty for doing this is a $250 fine.
• Keep the windshield clear. Allow the de-
froster to warm up properly while scraping

-- 31 of 56 --

28
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
the ice off windows. The windshield wash-
ing fluid should contain an anti-freeze solu-
tion; however, at high speeds in very cold
temperatures, the fluid may freeze on the
windshield and totally obscure your vision.
• Get the feel of the roadway. Try your brakes
while driving slowly and adjust your speed
to how much traction you have.
• Slow down. Snow tires or tire chains are help-
ful, but you should still double your distance
for following other vehicles. Studded snow
tires may be used from October 15 to April 15.
• Passing trucks may create snow fog. This
greatly reduces your visibility. Look ahead
for curves in the road, look behind for ve-
hicles following, and slow down.
• Remember 	that 	on 	bridges 	and 	shaded
spots, frost and ice form quicker and are re-
tained longer than on the rest of the roadway.
• To stop on ice, you should pump the brakes
when driving vehicles equipped with drum-
type brakes on all four wheels. Vehicles
equipped with disc brakes require a slow,
intermittent 	braking 	action—fully 	on 	and
then fully off—long enough to let the disc
brakes release so that all wheels are roll-
ing again. If you slam on your brakes, your
wheels will lock and your tires will skid.
• Keep firm and continuous pressure on anti-
lock brakes (ABS). Manually pumping anti-
lock brakes, or letting up on them, decreas-
es their effectiveness because it turns the
system off and on.
• Carry a winter survival kit in your vehicle:
warm 	clothing, 	footwear, 	shovel, 	energy
food, etc.
• If your vehicle becomes stuck in a snow-
storm, stay with the vehicle! Most deaths
occur when people leave their vehicles and
get lost. Open your windows slightly and run
the vehicle and heater for only short periods
of time to avoid carbon monoxide poison-
ing. Stay active and do not panic.
Meeting Snow Removal Equipment
Here are a few suggestions to help you recog-
nize winter driving hazards while plow trucks
are working:
• Stay well back from snowplows. Sometimes
they have to stop and back up. Plow drivers
can’t see directly behind themselves, and
plows also throw sanding material. Remem-
ber, don’t crowd the plow!
• Know where the plow is on multi-lane road-
ways. The plow could be in either lane or on
the shoulder.
• Be 	extremely 	cautious 	when 	passing 	a
snowplow. They can be moved sideways by
drifts and hard snow-pack.
• Never drive through “whiteouts” caused by
crosswinds or plowing light snow. Snow-
plows pull over and stop frequently to allow
traffic to pass. Be patient and wait until you
can see.
• Watch for plow trucks on Interstate ramps
and turning around on “authorized vehicle
only” cross-overs.
• Don’t assume you’ll have good traction be-
cause the road “looks” sanded. The sand can
sink into the snow-pack, leaving a slick surface.
• Slow down and drive according to the con-
ditions. Most winter crashes are caused by
driving too fast for conditions.

-- 32 of 56 --

29
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
SKIDS
Most skids are the result of driving too fast for
the road conditions on slippery roadways. The
key to safe vehicle operation is slower speeds.
In rear-wheel drive automobiles, you should
stay off the brakes and gradually ease off
the accelerator. Turn your wheels in the
direction the rear end of your vehicle is
skidding. If the rear end of the vehicle skids
right, steer right. If the rear end of the vehicle
skids left, steer left.
When 	front-wheel 	drive 	vehicles 	start 	to
skid when traveling at moderate speeds, you
should accelerate slightly and steer in the
direction you want to go. If there is no room
to accelerate, shift into neutral or push in the
clutch. Remember, front-wheel drive vehicles
have positive, accurate, and quick steering;
the vehicle goes exactly where you point it.
Four-wheel drive vehicles have a tendency
of giving the driver a false sense of security.
Therefore, slower speeds on slippery surfac-
es are extremely important. When traveling
at moderate speeds, you should accelerate
and steer into the direction of the skid.
At higher speeds, or in the event there is no
room to accelerate, you should push in the
clutch or with automatic transmission vehi-
cles, shift into neutral.
RAIN
A hard surface roadway is very slippery just
TO CORRECT
SKID
after it starts raining. Water combines with the
road dirt and oil to form a slick film between
your tires and the roadway surface.
When the water on the roadway becomes
deeper, another hazardous situation occurs:
hydroplaning. This occurs when your tires
ride on the water and not on roadway surface.
Rain reduces visibility and increases the pos-
sibility of a dangerous skid. Slow down and
be alert.
FLOODING
Flooding can occur when streams and rivers
flow over their banks, when dams or levees
break, when there is run-off from deep snow
or any time there is heavy rainfall. Floodwa-
ters can be found on roads, bridges and low
areas. Flash floods can come rapidly and un-
expectedly. They can occur within a few min-
utes or hours of excessive rainfall.
• It is not legal to enter a road that is officially
closed due to hazardous conditions. The
penalty for doing this is a $250 fine.
• Do not drive through flooded areas. If you
see a flooded roadway ahead, turn around
and find another route to get to your desti-
nation.
• Be cautious, especially at night, when the
visibility is limited.
• Remember, six inches of water will reach
the bottom of most passenger cars, causing
loss of control or possible stalling.
• Two feet of moving water can carry away
most vehicles including sport utility vehicles
and pick-up trucks.
• Even if the water appears shallow enough
to cross, do not attempt to cross a flooded
road. Water can hide dips, or worse, flood-
waters can damage roadways by washing
away the underlying road surface.
• If there is no other route, proceed to higher
ground and wait for the water to subside.

-- 33 of 56 --

30
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	Revised 2 023
FLAT TIRE OR BLOWOUTS
While you are driving, if one of your tires be-
comes flat or you have a blowout, you might
lose control of your vehicle. The warning sign
to listen for is a thumping sound. If a front tire
blows out, your vehicle will pull in the direc-
tion of the blown tire. A flat rear tire will cause
the vehicle to sway back and forth.
To regain control, grasp the steering wheel
tightly and steer straight ahead. Ease up on
the accelerator, but do not brake until you have
regained full control. Turn onto the shoulder
when your vehicle is almost stopped.
RUNNING OFF THE PAVEMENT
If your tire drops off the edge of the pavement
onto the shoulder, do not try to swerve back
onto the pavement because you may lose
control of your vehicle.
Grip the steering wheel and ease up on the
accelerator. If you brake hard, you may go
into a skid. After you have slowed down and
are in complete control, look for traffic behind
you, signal, and turn gently back onto the
pavement.
EQUIPMENT FAILURE
If your headlights suddenly fail, try your park-
ing lights and turn signals and leave the road-
way as soon as you have slowed down. Re-
member, without lights other drivers can no
longer see you.
If your windshield wipers fail in rain or snow,
slow down and stick your head out your side
window in order to see as you leave the road-
way.
If your accelerator pedal sticks, depress the
clutch or shift it into neutral. You may also turn
the engine off; however, this may result in the
loss of power steering and power brakes.
Never turn your vehicle’s ignition to the “lock”
position while it is still in motion. This will
cause the steering to lock if you try to turn the
steering wheel. When you can do so safely,
steer to the side of the road.
Brakes do their best job just before the tires
lock and start to skid or slide on the road sur-
face.
READING THE ROAD
As an operator, you must adjust your speed
to fit the weather, traffic conditions, and the
condition of the road. Slow down when you
are driving where there are ruts, holes, bro-
ken pavement, or other objects on the road.
Do not slam on your brakes or steer hard to
avoid these obstacles.
Driving on loose gravel is harder than driving
on pavement because your tires don’t have the
traction needed to give you stable control. Slow
down and avoid sudden changes in direction.
Should an oncoming vehicle cross into your
lane, slow down and try to warn the oncoming
driver by flashing your headlights. If the ve-
hicle keeps coming, pull as far to the right as
possible. If there could be a collision, steer off
the road to the right when conditions permit,
or stop on the far right shoulder of the road.
DISTRACTED DRIVING
Driving requires your full attention. It is not
legal for anyone to text (composing, reading,
or sending an electronic message) while driv-
ing or fail to maintain control of a motor vehi-
cle due to activity that is not necessary to the
operation of the vehicle and actually impairs,
or would reasonably be expected to impair,
the ability of the individual to safely operate
the vehicle. The penalty is a $100 fine.
DRIVING POSTURE
Drive with both hands holding the steering
wheel. You never know when evasive action
may be needed. So be ready. Use one foot to
operate both the gas pedal and brake pedal
to avoid riding the brakes which can cause
them to overheat.
FATIGUE
Fatigue (being tired) increases the chance of
a crash. If you are sleepy, the only safe cure
is to get some sleep. If you don’t, you risk
your life and the lives of others. Danger signs

-- 34 of 56 --

31
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
of fatigue are: difficulty in focusing or keeping
eyes open, inability to recall the last few miles
driven, having the sense of being detached or
watching the vehicle being driven rather than
driving it, crossing the centerline or dropping
off the edge of the pavement, missing traffic
signs or lights, tailgating or following other ve-
hicles more closely than you normally would,
forgetting to dim headlights, excessive yawn-
ing, and inability to hold head up (nodding off).
SHARING THE ROAD WITH TRUCKS
It may sound obvious, but trucks are not large
cars. To reduce the chance of a crash with a
large tractor-trailer, the so-called “18-wheel-
er,” drivers must be familiar with a truck’s
physical capabilities and common maneu-
vers.
Braking
Tractor-trailers take longer to stop than a car
traveling at the same speed. A fully-loaded
tractor-trailer may take more than 400 feet on
dry pavement to come to a complete stop, or
more than the length of a football field.
Turning
With any turning vehicle, the rear wheels fol-
low a shorter path than the front wheels. The
longer the vehicle, the greater the difference.
That’s why the drivers of tractor-trailers must
often swing out to the left as the first step in
making a right turn. When following a tractor-
trailer, observe its turn signals before trying
to pass. If it appears to be starting a left turn,
wait a moment to check and see which way
the driver is signaling he’s going to turn be-
fore passing on the right.
A Trucker’s Blind Spots (the “No-Zone”)
It is important to be seen whenever you are
driving. Many drivers falsely assume that a
trucker can see the road better because they
sit twice as high as the driver of a car. While
truckers do enjoy a better forward view and
have bigger mirrors, they still have serious
blind spots or no-zones into which a car can
disappear from view—up to 20 feet in front of
the cab, on either side of the tractor-trailer,
particularly alongside the cab, and up to 200
feet in the rear.

-- 35 of 56 --

32
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
Drivers lingering in the blind spots on the
sides and in the rear hamper a trucker’s abil-
ity to take evasive action to avoid a danger-
ous situation—and the possibility of a crash is
increased. An excellent rule of thumb for driv-
ers sharing the road with a tractor-trailer is, “If
you can’t see the truck driver in his or her side
mirror, he or she can’t see you.”
Maneuverability
Trucks are designed to carry many products to and
from towns and cities; they are not designed to
be as maneuverable as cars. Trucks have longer
stopping and accelerating distances, wider turning
radii, and weigh more. On multi-lane highways,
tractor-trailers stay in the center lane to help the
flow of local traffic on and off the highway. Staying
in the middle lane also increases the truck driver’s
options if he or she has to switch lanes in order to
avoid a dangerous situation or a crash.
Following is a list of some of the most common
mistakes drivers must avoid when driving around
trucks.
• Cutting off a truck in traffic or on the high-
way to reach your exit or turn. Cutting into
the open space in front of a truck removes
the truck driver’s cushion of safety. Trying
to beat a truck to a single-lane construction
zone represents a particularly dangerous
situation. Take a moment to slow down and
exit behind a truck—it will only take you a
few extra seconds.
• Don’t linger alongside a truck when passing.
Always pass a tractor-trailer completely and
always on the left side. If you linger when
passing any vehicle, your position makes
it impossible for the trucker to take evasive
action if an obstacle appears on the road
ahead.
• Following too close or tailgating. When fol-
lowing behind a truck, if you can’t see the
truck driver’s rearview mirrors, there is no
way the truck driver can see you. Tailgat-
ing a truck or car is dangerous because you
take away your own cushion of safety if the
vehicle in front of you stops short—and if
the vehicle you are following hits something
on the road, you will have no time to react
before it hits the front of your car.
• Never underestimate the size and speed of
an approaching tractor-trailer. Because of
its large size, a tractor-trailer often appears
to be traveling at a slower speed than it is.
A substantial number of car-truck collisions
take 	place 	at 	intersections 	because 	the
driver of the car does not realize how close
the truck is or how quickly it is approaching.
MOVE OVER
If a motor vehicle is stranded along the inter-
state or multilane highway outside city limits,
with flashing hazard lights, a driver approach-
ing or passing this vehicle should yield the
right of way and move safely to the lane not
adjacent to the stranded vehicle. If only lane
available to move safely to is the adjacent
lane to the stranded vehicle, proceed with
caution and reduce speed.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH
MOTORCYCLES
Motorcyclists have the same rights and re-
sponsibilities on public roadways as other
drivers. Special conditions and situations of-
ten cause greater problems for motorcyclists.
Drivers should be aware of these problems
so they can more safely share the roadway
with motorcyclists.
Special Hazards
• Allow the motorcyclist a full lane width.
Although it may seem as though there is
enough room in the traffic lane for an au-
tomobile and a motorcycle, remember the
motorcycle needs the room to maneuver
safely. Do not share the lane.
• Approximately 	one-half 	of 	all 	motorcycle
crashes 	involve 	another 	motor 	vehicle.
Nearly 40 percent were caused by the other
vehicle turning left in front of the motorcy-
clist.
• Motorcycles are small and may be difficult
to see. Motorcycles have a much smaller
profile than other vehicles, which can make
it more difficult to judge the speed and dis-
tance of an approaching motorcycle.

-- 36 of 56 --

33
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	 	R	 	evised 2 023
• Always signal your intentions before chang-
ing lanes or merging with traffic. This allows
the motorcyclist to anticipate traffic flow and
find a safe lane position.
• Remember that motorcyclists are often hid-
den in a vehicle’s blind spot or missed in
a quick look due to their smaller size. Al-
ways make a visual check for motorcycles
by checking mirrors and blind spots before
entering or leaving a lane of traffic and at
intersections.
• Don’t be fooled by a flashing turn signal
on a 	motorcycle—motorcycle signals usu-
ally are not self cancelling and riders some-
times forget to turn them off. Wait to be sure
the motorcycle is going to turn before you
proceed.
• Remember that road conditions which are
minor annoyances to you pose major haz-
ards 	to 	motorcyclists. 	Motorcyclists 	may
change speed or adjust their position within
a lane suddenly in reaction to road and traf-
fic conditions such as potholes, gravel, wet
or slippery surfaces, pavement seams, rail-
road crossings, and grooved pavement.
• Allow more following distance, three or four
seconds, following a motorcycle so the mo-
torcyclist has enough time to maneuver or
stop in an emergency. In dry conditions,
motorcycles can stop more quickly than a
car.
Being aware of these situations can help you
as a driver share the road safely with motor-
cyclists.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH BICYCLES
Bicyclists generally travel at slower speeds
than motorists which can create special con-
siderations for sharing the road safely.
• Remember to reduce speed when encoun-
tering bicyclists.
• Recognize situations that may be poten-
tially dangerous to bicyclists and give them
space.
• When passing, maintain a safe operating
distance between your car and a bicyclist.
The individual operating the motor vehicle
is required to leave a minimum of three feet
of passing space between the vehicle and
bicycle. Pass a bicyclist only when road and
traffic conditions dictate that it is safe to do
so. Check over your shoulder after passing
a bicyclist and before moving back t normal
position. In inclement weather, give bicy-
clists extra room.
• Scan for bicyclists in traffic, particularly at
intersections. Most crashes involving a mo-
tor vehicle and a bicyclist occur at intersec-
tions. Allow bicyclists extra time to cross in-
tersections.
• When turning right, check your blind spot
for bicyclists before initiating the turn.
• Avoid driving in designated bicycle lanes
other than to make a right turn. Do so safely;
signal and look before moving into the bi-
cycle lane on approach to your turn.
• Children on bicycles are often unpredict-
able and may not have adequate knowl-
edge of traffic laws. Children may be harder
to see because they are typically smaller
than adults. So, expect the unexpected and
slow down!
SEAT BELTS
There is no good excuse for not wearing seat
belts. Seat belts have been proven to be one of
the most effective safety devices today. Most of
the traffic deaths and serious injuries occur when
the driver and passengers are ejected or are
thrown onto the dashboard. Your chances of be-
ing killed are four times greater if you are thrown
from the vehicle. Seat belts help keep vehicle oc-
cupants in place, reducing the chance of death or
injury. This is not only for highway driving. In fact,
crashes causing injury are most likely to occur at
speeds less than 40 miles per hour and within 25
miles of home. At 30 miles per hour, the force is
like hitting the ground from the top of a three-sto-
ry building. Drivers have much to gain by taking
a few seconds to fasten their seat belts. Not only
do seat belts protect you, but seat belts help you
maintain proper riding and driving posture mak-
ing you feel less tired after a trip.

-- 37 of 56 --

34
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
Belts must be worn correctly. Lap belts should
lie snug and low across the hips, not across
the 	abdomen. 	Shoulder 	belts 	should 	lie
across the chest and over the collarbone with
minimal, if any, slack.
Automatic seat belts automatically move into
place around front-seat occupants when the
car doors are closed. A separate lap belt must
be fastened manually to provide sufficient
protection with automatic shoulder belts.
Wear Your Belt Correctly
North Dakota’s seat belt law requires all oc-
cupants to wear seat belts in all seating posi-
tions.
AIR BAGS
Air bags are designed to provide supplemen-
tal protection for belted front-seat occupants
in a frontal crash. Lap/shoulder belts must al-
ways be used in conjunction with an airbag to
protect occupants in side-impact and roll-over
crashes. Air bags work best when everyone
is buckled and children, especially those age
12 and younger, are properly restrained in
the back seat. If you transport children, check
the vehicle and child restraint manufacturers’
recommendations for child restraint use in ve-
hicles with side air bags.
CHILD RESTRAINTS (Car Safety Seats)
Motor vehicle crashes are a leading cause of
death and injury for children in North Dakota.
YES! 	NO!
NO!	NO!
Tragically, most deaths and injuries can be
prevented with the proper use of car safety
seats and seat belts.
North Dakota’s child passenger safety law re-
quires:
• Children under eight years of age must be
properly secured in a child restraint (car
seat or booster seat). 	A seat belt may be
substituted for children who are at least 57
inches tall.
• Children 	ages 	eight 	through 	seventeen
must be properly secured in a seat belt or
child restraint.
• Child restraints and seat belts must be used
correctly following the manufacturer’s in-
structions.
The penalty for violation is $25 and one point
against the license of the driver.
Incorrectly-used car seats may not protect a
child in a crash. Follow the manufacturer’s
instructions and vehicle owner’s manual ex-
actly. Correct use of a child restraint includes
(1) installing the car seat tightly in the vehicle
with the safety belt or LATCH system and (2)
snugly securing the child in the car safety
seat.
Other child passenger safety tips:
• Children under age 13 should ride in the
back seat —even if the vehicle does not
have an airbag.
• Never place a rear-facing infant car seat in
front of an airbag.
• Children should be at least 40 pounds and
at least 4 years of age to move from a car
seat to a booster seat.
• Never allow children to ride in the cargo
area of a pickup truck.
• Never buckle two children into one seat belt.
For more information, contact the North Da-
kota Department of Health at www.ndhealth.
gov/injury/ or call 1-800-472-2286.

-- 38 of 56 --

35
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
HEATSTROKE
Heatstroke is one of the leading causes of
non-crash-related fatalities among children.
Vehicle heatstroke occurs when a child is left
in a vehicle, allowing for the child’s body tem-
perature to rise in a quick and deadly manner.
Heatstroke begins when the core body tem-
perature reaches about 104 degrees and the
thermoregulatory system is overwhelmed. A
core body temperature of about 107 degrees
is lethal. Unfortunately, even great parents
can forget a child in the back seat. Other risk
factors include caregivers who are not used
to driving kids, or whose routine suddenly
changes. Whether you are a parent, care-
giver, or bystander of a child left in a vehicle,
it is vitally important to understand children
are more vulnerable to heatstroke than adults
are.
Even in cooler temperatures, your vehicle
can heat up to dangerous temperatures very
quickly. An outside temperature in the mid-
60s can cause a vehicle’s inside temperature
to rise above 110 degrees Fahrenheit. The
inside temperature of a vehicle can rise al-
most 20 degrees Fahrenheit within the first 10
minutes.
HEATSTROKE PREVENTION TIPS
• Look before you lock. Make it a habit to look
in your back seat before you lock.
• Keep your vehicle locked and keep your
keys out of reach. Nationally, nearly 3 in 10
heatstroke deaths happen when an unat-
tended child gains access to a vehicle.
• Take action if you notice a child alone in a
vehicle.
It is never okay to leave a child alone in a ve-
hicle for any amount of time, as it can lead to
tragedy. These deaths, while accidental, are
always preventable.
DRINKING, DRUGS, AND DRIVING
ALCOHOL
More traffic deaths on the nation’s highways
are caused by alcohol than any other single
cause. In North Dakota, nearly half of the
traffic deaths involve drivers who have been
drinking prior to the crash. There is evidence
proving that if you drink—even just a little—
your chances of a crash are seven times
greater than if you were completely sober.
Alcohol is a drug that slows the activity of the
brain. When alcohol enters the stomach, it
goes directly into the blood and other parts
of the body. It reduces the amount of oxygen
that reaches the brain cells.
Alcohol 	directly 	affects 	a 	person’s 	ability
to drive. When a person drinks increasing
amounts of alcohol, the degree of impairment
and the intensity of the effect will rise rapidly.
The amount or concentration of alcohol in the
blood or breath is known as Alcohol Concen-
tration or AC. Three factors influence a per-
son’s AC:
1. THE ALCOHOL CONTENT. In the “aver-
age drink” the alcohol content is about the
same whether it’s a 12-ounce can of beer,
a 4-ounce glass of wine, or a 1-ounce glass
of scotch or whiskey. Remember that, in
reality, mixed drinks at home or in a lounge
VARY a great degree. Drinks at a private
party tend to be quite a bit stronger.
2. THE PERIOD OF TIME OVER WHICH
THE ALCOHOL WAS CONSUMED. The
more alcohol you consume the longer it
takes to sober up. Time is the only way to
eliminate alcohol from the blood stream.
This process is relatively slow and will not
be quickened by drinking coffee, taking
cold showers, or exercising.
3. THE PERSON’S LEAN BODY WEIGHT.
Larger people have more blood and flu-
ids which will dilute the alcohol consumed
more than in a smaller person.
EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL
1. Alcohol slows down reactions.
2. Alcohol impairs vision.
3. Alcohol interferes with concentration.

-- 39 of 56 --

36
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	Revised 2 023
4. Alcohol dulls judgment.
5. Alcohol creates a false sense of confi-
dence.
Alcohol is a drug that depresses the central
nervous system and slows down brain activ-
ity. Alcohol in the bloodstream slows reaction
time, interferes with the driver’s vision, and
causes dangerous situations to appear “not
so dangerous.”
IMPLIED CONSENT
Upon receiving your license to operate a mo-
tor vehicle in North Dakota, you have given
your consent to a chemical test to determine
the level of alcohol and/or drug content in your
blood, breath, urine, or saliva. If you refuse to
take the test, your license will be revoked for
180 days to three years. Remember: A chem-
ical test can help you. If you are not legally
intoxicated, the test will show it.
DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE
If a chemical test reveals that you have eight
one-hundredths 	of 	one 	percent 	(.08%) 	or
greater of alcohol in your blood, or .02% if un-
der the age of 21, you are considered legally
to be under the influence of alcohol. The pen-
alties for driving in this dangerous condition
are harsh.
What will happen to your driving privi-
leges?
There are two separate penalties involved
under the DUI law. One is an administrative
license penalty, the other is a court conviction
penalty. Your driving privileges may be sus-
pended through either or both processes.
• If you have an alcohol concentration (AC) of
.08 percent or more or .02 percent or more
if you are under age 21, your license will be
suspended for:
» 91 days, first offense in seven years
» 180 days, first offense, AC .18 or greater
in seven years
» 365 days, second offense in seven years
» two years, second offense, AC .18 or
greater in seven years
» two years, third and subsequent offense
in seven years
» three 	years, 	third 	and 	subsequent 	of-
fense, AC .18 or greater in seven years
• If you refuse to take either an AC test or a
roadside preliminary breath test (PBT), your
license will be revoked for 180 days to three
years.
• Temporary restricted license can be issued
after serving at least 30 days of suspension
or after serving at least 14 days if participat-
ing in the 24/7 Sobriety Program.
• Temporary restricted licenses can only be
issued if within the past 7 years there has
been a refusal or more than one alcohol/
drug related violation. Participation in the
24/7 Sobriety Program is required until one
year violation free.
There are also harsh penalties for driving
while your license is suspended or revoked
after an alcohol-related violation—four days
mandatory minimum jail sentence and a fine
of up to $1,000.
• The license plates and registration card
for your vehicle may be impounded for the
length of the suspension/revocation.
What happens if you’re convicted?
If convicted through the court process, in ad-
dition to losing your driving privilege, you also
face mandatory fines and jail sentences.
• First conviction—$500 fine.
• First conviction if the AC is .16% or greater
—at least $750 fine and two days impris-
onment. The term of imprisonment may be
converted to community service.
• Second 	conviction 	within 	seven 	years
—$1,000 fine and 10 days in jail and at least
12 months in the 24/7 Sobriety Program as
a mandatory condition of probation.
• Third conviction within seven years—$2,000

-- 40 of 56 --

37
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
fine and 120 days in jail and participation in
the 24/7 Sobriety Program as a mandatory
condition of probation.
• Fourth or subsequent offense—$2,000 fine
and one year and one day in jail and par-
ticipation in the 24/7 Sobriety Program as a
mandatory condition of probation.
In addition, all convicted offenders are re-
quired to submit to a mandatory alcohol ad-
diction 	evaluation 	and 	complete 	any 	rec-
ommended 	treatment. 	These 	are 	just 	the
minimum penalties. It could be worse!
What happens if you cause a serious
injury or death?
In addition to the minimum penalties for DUI,
if you are involved in a crash and cause a se-
rious injury to another, you will spend an ad-
ditional 90 days in jail. If you cause the death
of another, your time in jail is extended by one
year.
What happens to your insurance?
If you refuse to take an AC test, or if convicted
of a DUI, the law requires you to show proof
of financial responsibility (SR 22 insurance
coverage).
Typically, motor vehicle insurance is obtained
to satisfy this requirement. Chances are your
annual motor vehicle insurance rates could
double—or even triple!
REPORTING IMPAIRED DRIVING
If you exhibit or encounter out-of-the-ordinary
driving that would indicate alcohol impair-
ment, anyone can report this to law enforce-
ment by dialing 911.
OPEN CONTAINER LAW
It is illegal for anyone, driver or passenger,
to drink alcoholic beverages in or on a mo-
tor vehicle. You cannot legally have an open
container in your vehicle. The seal cannot be
broken. Any open containers must be placed
in the trunk of the vehicle.
MINOR IN POSSESSION/CONSUMPTION
LAW
Persons under 21 years of age are prohibited
from purchasing, consuming, or possessing
alcoholic beverages.
DRUGS
Drugs and driving do not mix. Even certain
cold tablets and capsules can affect your driv-
ing ability by making you drowsy at the wheel.
Read all directions carefully.
As with alcohol, operating while under the in-
fluence of a narcotic drug is especially dan-
gerous. Not only do you endanger your life,
but you also endanger the lives of others us-
ing the same road. The harsh penalties that
deal with operating under the influence of al-
cohol also apply to narcotic drugs.
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
PEDESTRIANS
Traffic rules apply to pedestrians as well as
motorists. Some special rules for pedestrians
are listed below.
Remember: Joggers are considered pedestri-
ans and must also obey these rules.
Obey traffic signals. Walk in the crosswalks.
Do not start to cross the roadway on a flash-
ing “Don’t Walk” signal. If you are already in
the intersection, move to the other side at a
normal pace.
If you cross a road where there is no cross-
walk, you must yield the right of way to all ve-
hicles on the roadway.
Do not cross intersections diagonally unless
an official traffic control device says you may.
Walk facing traffic. Use sidewalks when you
can; if there are no sidewalks, get as far off
the road as possible.
You have the right of way only in crosswalks.
Yield to vehicles any place else. Use your
common sense—yield if there is any danger.

-- 41 of 56 --

38
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	Revised 2 023
ping (see page 16).
• Do not carry more people on a bicycle or
motorized bicycle than it was designed to
carry.
• All bicycles and motorized bicycles must be
equipped with a brake.
• If under 18, an approved safety helmet is
required to operate a motorized bicycle. A
good practice is to wear a safety helmet
while riding a bicycle and motorized bicycle
regardless of age.
• It is a good idea to wear brightly-colored
clothing to increase your visibility in traffic.
• Only carry a package or bundle if it allows
you to keep at least one hand on the han-
dlebar.
• Do not hold on to other moving vehicles for
the purpose of being towed.
• At night, all bicycles must be equipped with a
headlight visible from a distance of 500 feet.
The bicycle must also have a red reflector
on the rear. If equipped with a taillight, it
must be visible for 500 feet to the rear.
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
The operator of an off-highway vehicle must
be in possession of a valid driver’s license,
permit, or an off-highway vehicle safety cer-
tificate issued by the North Dakota Parks and
Recreation Department. For complete infor-
mation on minimum age requirements, call
328-5357 or visit www.parkrec.nd.gov
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES RULES
There are a number of rules regulating the
operation of an off-highway vehicle. Here are
some of them:
• Persons under the age of 18 must wear a
safety helmet that meets United States De-
partment of Transportation standards.
• Do not operate an off-highway vehicle on
the roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or
slope of any road, street, or highway except
as provided in Chapter 39-29 of the North
When you walk at night, walk facing traffic
and wear light or white clothing. Make sure
drivers can see you.
You are not allowed to stand on the traveled
portion of the street or highway for the pur-
pose of hitchhiking.
Drivers must always be on the lookout for pe-
destrians. Be alert for children at play. For in-
stance, a ball rolling onto the street tells you a
child might be chasing it. Your reactions might
save a life.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Bicycles and Motorized Bicycles
Traffic laws apply to everyone. Whether you
are driving a car, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, or
motorized bicycle, you must always obey the
same basic rules of the road.
A motorized bicycle is a two- or three-wheeled
vehicle no more than 32 inches wide. It must
also have:
1. Foot pedals or footrests.
2. Maximum piston or rotor displacement of
49.98 cc. (3.05 cubic inches) enabling a
speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour on
a level surface.
3. An automatic drive system not requiring
the use of a clutch.
To operate a motorized bicycle, you must be
at least 14 years of age or older and have in
your immediate possession a valid operator’s
license, motorized bicycle permit, operator
permit, temporary permit, instruction permit,
or motorcycle permit.
Rules and Guidelines
• Obey all traffic laws.
• Ride not more than two abreast (single file
is safest).
• Keep to the right side of the roadway.
• Give pedestrians the right of way.
• Use hand signals before turning and stop-

-- 42 of 56 --

39
Noncommercial D river L icense M a nual	 	R	 	evised 2 023
Dakota Century Code. Review your owners
manual before operating.
• Cross streets or highways at an angle of ap-
proximately 90 degrees to the direction of
the highway and at a place where no ob-
struction prevents a quick and safe cross-
ing. Come to a complete stop before cross-
ing the shoulder or main-traveled roadway.
You must yield the right of way to all road-
way traffic. When crossing a divided high-
way, cross only at an intersection of the
highway with another street or highway.
• Except in emergencies, you may not oper-
ate within the right of way of any controlled-
access highway.
• A person who is performing pest control or
survey work for a political subdivision may
operate an off-highway vehicle on the bot-
tom, back slope, inside slope, and shoulder
of a highway other than a controlled-access
highway.
• A licensed driver may operate a registered
off-highway vehicle:
» On a gravel, dirt, or loose surface roadway.
» On 	a 	paved 	highway 	designated 	and
posted at a speed not exceeding 55 mph.
• 	A licensed driver over 16 years of age may
operate a registered class III off-highway
vehicle on a paved highway designated and
posted at a speed not exceeding 65 mph.
• All off-highway vehicles operated on paved
highways or gravel, dirt, or loose surface
roadways must meet the equipment require-
ment in 39-29 of the North Dakota Century
Code.
SNOWMOBILES
In order to operate a snowmobile on a high-
way right of way, you must have in your pos-
session a valid driver’s license or a snow-
mobile safety certificate issued by the North
Dakota Parks and Recreation Department.
For complete information on minimum age
requirements, call 328-5357 or visit www.
parkrec.nd.gov.
Equipment
Your snowmobile must have:
• A headlight.
• A taillight.
• Brakes.
• A leakproof exhaust system which includes
a muffler.
Snowmobile Rules
There are a number of different rules regulat-
ing when and where you can operate a snow-
mobile. Here are some of them.
• Persons under the age of 18 must wear a
safety helmet that meets United States De-
partment of Transportation standards.
• Never operate a snowmobile on the road-
way, shoulder, or inside bank of any road in
North Dakota.
• Never operate on the right of way of any In-
terstate highway. The right of way includes
the driving portion of the road, the median,
the shoulders, and the ditches on either
side.
• If you operate in any ditch alongside the
roadway, move in the same direction as
roadway traffic.
• Never operate on any right of way from April
1 to November 1 of any year.
• If you must cross a roadway, yield the right
of way to all roadway traffic. Come to a
complete stop before reaching the shoulder
of the road; proceed at right angles to the
road when it is clear.
• On a divided highway, cross only at inter-
sections.
• When required for your safety and that of
others, use your headlights and taillights.
• Never operate while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs.
• Do not harass any animals with your snow-
mobile. You are liable for damages.
• Never 	operate 	where 	your 	machine 	will
damage trees and plants.
• Do not operate on private land without per-
mission.

-- 43 of 56 --

40
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
POINT SYSTEM
North Dakota uses a point system to improve
safety on the roads. Under the North Dakota
point system, each traffic violation is assigned
a certain amount of points. The more serious
the offense, the higher its point value. After
each violation, the corresponding amount of
points are added to the driver’s record. This
normally occurs within 10 days of convic-
tion. When the record reveals a total of 12 or
more points, the driver will be informed that
the authorities intend to suspend his or her
license. The driver will also be notified that he
or she may have an administrative hearing.
If it is found to be true that the driver in ques-
tion has 12 or more points, the license will be
suspended according to the following table:
The point total can be reduced:
1. ONE POINT—for every three-month peri-
od during which the driver has not had any
points recorded against his/her record.
2. THREE POINTS—if the driver completes
an approved driver improvement course
such as a defensive driving course.
3. A person may elect to attend a driver im-
provement course in lieu of points on the
driving record for violations assigned five
or less points. This option is valid once ev-
ery 12 months and may not be used in con-
junction with item 2 above.
PARENT/GUARDIAN DRIVER
COACHING TIPS
WITHDRAWAL OF PARENTAL CONSENT
Consent of a parent or legal guardian is re-
quired for a minor to get a permit or a license.
The person who consented can withdraw the
consent at any time and the permit or license
will be cancelled. A teen can regain their permit
or license with parental consent or when they
reach the age of 18.
DRIVING RISKS — What Parents Need to
Know
Driving can be a potentially dangerous en-
deavor for everyone; however, it is more dan-
gerous for young drivers. Novice teen drivers
crash more than any other age group. There
are many reasons for this, including:
• Young Age/Lack of Maturity: Teenagers
can make more errors in judgment than oth-
er age groups. Be aware your teen is likely
to drive differently and take more risks when
you are not in the vehicle.
• Brain Development: Teens should be the
world’s best drivers. Their muscles are well
toned, their reaction time quick, their eye-
hand coordination at a peak. Yet car crash-
es kill more of them than any other cause —
a problem, some researchers believe, that
is rooted in the adolescent brain. A National
Institutes of Health study suggests that the
region of the brain that inhibits risky behav-
ior is not fully formed until age 25.
• Risky Driving Behaviors: Teenagers may
engage in risky driving behaviors. These
include speeding, running red and yellow
lights, running stop signs, tailgating, weav-
ing in and out of traffic, not keeping a safe
distance for merging or changing lanes,
misjudging gaps in traffic, and misjudging
the capability of their vehicle.
• Distractions: Any new or inexperienced
driver is challenged when faced with driving
distractions. Music, cell phones, pets, and
passengers are best left at home while your
teen is learning to drive.
• Driving Inexperience: Teenagers lack driv-
ing experience. It takes a LOT of practice
to be able to safely maneuver in everyday
situations and unexpected circumstances.
Teens show the greatest improvement with-
in the first year and 1,000 miles of driving.
They continue to improve through their first
5,000 miles of driving.
HIGH-RISK DRIVING CONDITIONS
• Driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs: Drinking any — yes, any — amount
Accumulated Point
Total 	Period of Suspension
12 	7 days
13 and above 7 days for each point
over 11

-- 44 of 56 --

41
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
of alcohol produces impairment. Not only is
the use of alcohol and illicit drugs illegal, the
combination of alcohol or drugs and driving
can be deadly.
• High Speeds: For teen drivers (especially
males), most severe crashes occur at high
speeds. Crash risk, severity, and force all
increase as speed increases.
• Passengers: For teen drivers, as the num-
ber of passengers increase, teen crashes
increase. Driving is a “new skill” for teens,
and they need to pay close attention. Teen
passengers can be a major distraction. Teen
passengers may intentionally or unintention-
ally encourage friends to speed, show off, or
not pay enough attention to driving.
• Night Driving: For teen drivers, the most
severe crashes occur at night and on week-
ends. Night driving is challenging for all driv-
ers, but novice teen drivers do not have the
experience to anticipate and react to condi-
tions at night when visibility is reduced. Make
sure your teen gets extensive practice driv-
ing with you in varied types of weather. Be
aware that teenagers driving at night usually
include a lack of adult supervision, carrying
passengers, and driving at high speeds, all
of which increase risk exponentially.
• Seat Belt Non-Use: Seat belt non-use is a
problem for both drivers and passengers.
Seat belts are important because they keep
the driver and passengers inside the vehicle
where they are the safest.
Driver education is the beginning of the
process of learning to drive, but teens need
many, many hours of practice to become safe
drivers.
TIPS FOR SUPERVISING TEEN DRIVING
PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE!! Prac-
tice as much as possible, even after your teen
gets their license.
• Who: Practice with only you and your teen
in the vehicle. Other people, pets, etc., can
distract both of you and increase stress. Re-
member: remain calm and focused; making
mistakes is part of learning, and practice
driving is serious, but it should also be inter-
esting and engaging.
• What: Practice the driving skills yourself that
your teen is learning. Begin with basic skills
such as turning, parking, and backing up.
Then, practice more complex skills such as
changing lanes and merging.
• When: In the beginning, practice during day-
light hours with good weather. As your teen’s
skills increase, gradually expose them to
different 	roads, 	weather 	conditions, 	and
times of day.
• Where: In the beginning, practice in safe,
low-risk driving areas. Start out in empty
parking lots or on remote roads. As your
teen’s 	skills 	increase, 	progress 	to 	quiet
neighborhood streets and later to busier
roads and highways.
• Why: Learning to drive is a complex, on-
going process requiring responsibility and
dedication from both parents and teens.
New drivers need a lot of practice to handle
daily driving hazards and unexpected situa-
tions. Teens will show the greatest improve-
ment in the first 1,000 to 5,000 miles of driving.
Do These Each Time You Practice
• Be in the “practicing mood.” Practice
when both of you are ready, in good moods,
have sufficient time, and are well rested.
• Adjust mirrors, seat belts, seats, and
steering wheel position before starting
the vehicle.
• Always wear your seat belts and use
your headlights day and night!
• Come to a complete stop at stop signs
and for right turns at red lights.
• When proceeding from a stop look left,
then front (straight ahead), then right before
proceeding.
• Keep your eyes moving. Use your mirrors
to check around and behind the vehicle ev-
ery 6-8 seconds.

-- 45 of 56 --

42
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
• Keep at least a 3-4 second space between
your vehicle and others in traffic flow. Try to
stay centered in your lane of travel.
• Avoid the “No-Zone” with trucks or bus-
es. This is about 15 feet on all sides of the
truck. If you cannot see truck drivers in their
mirrors, they cannot see you either.
• Be aware—Speed increases braking dis-
tance. Doubling your speed will quadruple
your braking distance. The faster you’re go-
ing, the longer it takes to stop.
• Be 	aware—Vehicle 	weight 	increases
braking distance. Doubling your vehicle
weight will double your braking distance. If
you are driving a large vehicle or towing a
trailer it takes longer to stop.
North Dakota law sets requirements for teen
driving, but families need to determine other
rules and limits for their teen drivers. Make
sure that family rules are very clear from the
beginning. Talk to your teen about driving
every chance you get.
USE A PARENT-TEEN DRIVING
AGREEMENT
Use a Parent-Teen Driving Agreement to de-
termine appropriate rules and guidelines for
your teen driver, and to make sure everyone
is clear about them! A sample agreement can
be found on the internet at www.dot.nd.gov/di-
visions/safety/teens-parents.htm under “Edu-
cation.”
DRIVING RULES/GUIDELINES FOR
YOUR FAMILY
• Require Seat Belt Use: This applies to
your teen and all passengers at all times.
• Prohibit Alcohol and/or Drug Use: This
applies to your teen as the driver of any ve-
hicle.
• Prohibit Riding with Someone Who Has
Used Alcohol or Drugs: This applies to
your teen as the passenger in another ve-
hicle.
• Require Compliance With Speed Lim-
its: Stress that this applies to all roads at
all times because crash forces at higher
speeds kill.
• Prohibit Distractions While Driving: Pro-
hibit cell phone use, eating, drinking, pets or
changing radio or CDs while driving.
• Require a Full Report: Require informa-
tion about each trip before leaving, includ-
ing where your teen is going, with whom,
and when they will return so that you know
where they are.
PROVIDE A SAFE, RELIABLE VEHICLE
FOR YOUR TEEN
• Mid- to full-size sedans and station wagons
with smaller engines and airbags are safest
for teen drivers.
• Under certain conditions, small trucks and
SUVs may be more prone to roll-overs than
other types of vehicles.
• High-performance 	cars 	may 	encourage
teens to drive beyond their experience level.
IMPOSE CONSEQUENCES FOR
VIOLATING RULES/GUIDELINES
• Make consequences relate to losing driv-
ing privileges: for a day, weekend, week,
month, etc., depending on the violation.
• Consequences not related to losing driving
privileges will not be as effective in sending
the messages: “You must be a responsible
driver” and “I am serious about your follow-
ing the rules and limits for driving.”
• Consider requiring your teen to complete
additional supervised practice.
Make consequences known: Set conse-
quences for common violations before they
occur so that your teen knows what to expect.
• Getting a speeding ticket.
• Coming home less than 30 minutes after
curfew.
• Coming home more than 30 minutes after
curfew.
• Lying about their whereabouts.

-- 46 of 56 --

43
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
• Violating passenger restrictions.
In North Dakota, teen drivers account for
about 20 percent of fatal crashes.
So, before you ever get into the car, make
sure that both you and your teen
understand the basics.
TEEN-DRIVER TRAINING ORIENTATION
Before you begin training, make sure you
know common teen driving errors and ways
you can help your teen be a better driver.
Top 11 Driving Errors
1. Not attending to the path of travel.
2. Driving five or more miles per hour too
fast for conditions.
3. Driving too fast through a curve.
4. Inadequate search at an intersection and
failing to yield to cross traffic.
5. Lack of attention at an intersection and
being struck by another driver.
6. Improper evasive action — quick turn not
executed properly.
7. Failure to maintain visual lead.
8. Failure to see action developing at side of
the roadway.
9. Following too closely.
10. Willfully taking right-of-way.
11. Distracted.
AGGRESSIVE DRIVING
Drivers who routinely speed, run red lights
and stop signs, tailgate, and otherwise disre-
gard the safety of other motorists are turning
streets and highways into high-risk arenas.
Aggressive driving can easily escalate into
road rage. We’re all too familiar with stories
of motorists who have killed or injured other
drivers for seemingly trivial reasons.
When is it Aggressive Driving?
The following attitudes and behaviors indicate
that problem driving behaviors are related to
aggression rather than inexperience:
• Constant rushing, lane jumping, and the
need to “get ahead.”
• Ignoring road signs and regulations.
• Constantly ridiculing and criticizing other
drivers.
• Denying entry into your lane or preventing
passing.
• Speeding past another car, revving engine.
• Tailgating a driver to go faster or get out of
their way.
• Honking, yelling, or making visible insulting
gestures.
When Confronted by Aggressive Drivers:
• First and foremost, make every attempt to
get out of their way.
• Put your pride in the back seat. Do not chal-
lenge them by speeding up or attempting to
“hold-your-own” in your travel lane.
• Wear your seat belt. It will hold you in your
seat and behind the wheel in case you need
to make an abrupt driving maneuver and it
will protect you in a crash.
• Avoid eye contact.
• Ignore gestures and refuse to return them.
• Report aggressive drivers to the appropri-
ate authorities by providing a vehicle de-
scription, license number, location, and if
possible, direction of travel.
• If you have a cell phone, and can do it safe-
ly, call 911.

-- 47 of 56 --

44
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
NOTES
The exercise above illustrates the area
around the car the driver cannot see:
• While your teen is sitting in the driver’s seat
with the engine off, get out of the car and
stand close to the front bumper facing the
driver.
• Begin taking steps backward and have your
teen tap the horn when he or she can see
your feet.
• Place a cone or cup in that spot. This is the
pavement area in front of the vehicle that
cannot be seen when looking out of the
windshield.
•
• Ask the driver to use the inside mirror and/
or to look over the right shoulder, and re-
peat this process to the rear of the vehicle.
• Walk backwards from the passenger doors
on the left and right sides of the vehicle and
place cups or cones to mark the side areas
visible to the driver.
• Have your teen measure these distances
and record them.
AN EXERCISE TO BECOME FAMILIAR WITH BLIND SPOTS

-- 48 of 56 --

45
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
SUPERVISED DRIVING LOG
Instruction permit holders under the age of 16 must complete a minimum of 50 hours of super-
vised, behind-the-wheel driving experience in various driving conditions that include:
• Driving in rural areas.
• Driving in urban areas.
• Driving on gravel, dirt, or aggregate surface roads.
• Night driving.
• Driving in winter conditions.
The log below will help you keep track of the hours required. Please note that the 50 hours
of supervised driving is in addition to the formal drivers education requirements.
Driving Log: Must practice driving in each
of these conditions. When added together,
must total a minimum of 50 hours.
Hours 	Hours 	Hours 	Hours 	Hours 	Hours 	Hours
Rural Areas
Urban Areas
Gravel/Dirt/Aggregate Road Surfaces
Night Driving
Winter Driving
TOTAL HOURS
Notes:

-- 49 of 56 --

46
Noncommercial Driver License Manual	Revised 2023
FLY?	FLY?
DRIVER
	LICENSE
Sample
1 	1 	2proof of age and identity 	proof of social security proofs of North Dakota
residency
SUCH AS:
Ÿ U.S. Birth Certificate
Ÿ Passport (valid only).
SUCH AS: 	SUCH AS:
Ÿ Original Social Security
Card
Ÿ W-2 Form
Ÿ SSA-1099 Form
Ÿ Utility Bill
Ÿ Lease/Mortgage Document
Ÿ Homeowner's/Renter's
Insurance
If your North Dakota driver license or ID doesn't have a
federally-required REAL ID gold star 	by
May 7, 2025,
you may not be able to fly in the United States.
WHAT type of documentation is needed for REAL ID?
LEARN MORE: real-id.dot.nd.gov
DOES YOUR LICENSE	DOES 	LICENSE	YOUR
*For a full list of document options go to NDDOT website.
* May need additional
documentation if name varies
from ID document.

-- 50 of 56 --

47
Noncommercial Driver License Manual 	Revised 2023
www.ndsc.org
For more information, call
701-223-6372 or 800-932-8890
In-Person Courses
Public Course (voluntary): $60
Distance-Learning Courses
Public Course (voluntary): $80
Alive at 25 is a highly interactive 4.5-hour program targeted
toward drivers under the age of 25 that helps young drivers take
greater responsibility for their driving. Whereas driver education
teaches the mechanics of car and road handling and state law,
Alive at 25 focuses on behavior, judgment, decision making and
consequences, and provides tools for making positive choices.
Defensive Driving course
also available for
experienced drivers.
But you can give them the tools to be safer.
Plus, courses are approved in ND for
insurance discount and point reduction!
10% Discount
Use coupon code NDDOT

-- 51 of 56 --

INDEX
Aggressive Driving. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	43
Air Bags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	34
Alcohol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	35
Applying for a License or Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	4
Backing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	27
Bicycles - Sharing the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	33
Blindspots - Become Familiar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	44
Change of Name or Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	7
Child Restraints (Car Safety Seats). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	34
Classes of Licenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	8
Coasting Prohibited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	26
Crash Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	27
Distracted Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Driving Posture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Driving Risks - What Parents Need to Know . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	40
Driving Rules/Guidelines for Your Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	42
Driving While Under the Influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	36
Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	37
Duplicate Licenses/Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	7
Equipment Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Examinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	5
Exemptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	3
Fatigue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Flat Tire or Blowouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Flooding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	29
Following & Stopping Distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	21
Hand Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	19
High-Risk Driving Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	40
Implied Consent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	36
Impose Consequences for Violating Rules/Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	42
Interchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	24
Interstate Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	23
Lane Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	21

-- 52 of 56 --

Littering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	27
Minor in Possession/Consumption Law. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	37
Minors Driver License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	6
Motorcycles - Sharing the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	32
Special Hazards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	32
Night Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	24
Open Container Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	37
Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	6
Parent-Teen Driving Agreement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	42
Parking
Do Not Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	26
Emergency Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	26
Leaving a Parking Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	26
Parallel Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	25
Parking on a Hill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	25
Passing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	21
Pavement Markings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	16
Pedestrians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	37
People Who Cannot Get a License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	3
Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	3
Point System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	40
Provide a Safe, Reliable Vehicle for Your Teen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	42
Railroad Crossings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	18
Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	29
Reading the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Recreational Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	38
Bicycles and Motorized Bicycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	38
Off-Highway Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	38
Snowmobiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	39
Registering Your Motor Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	8
Renewals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	7
Reporting Impaired Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	37
Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	7
Right of Way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	19
Roundabouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	23

-- 53 of 56 --

Running off the Pavement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	30
Seat Belts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	33
Signals
Flashing Indications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	15
Left Turn Indications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	15
Traffic Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	15
Signs
Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	14
Pedestrian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	12
Regulatory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	9
School . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	12
Special Warning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	12
Warning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	11
Skids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	29
Speed Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	20
Stop Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	17
Teen-Driver Training Orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	43
Top 11 Driving Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	43
Teen Driving - Tips for Supervising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	41
Do These Each Time You Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	41
Towing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	26
Trucks - Sharing the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	31
Blind Spots (the “No-Zone”) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	31
Braking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	31
Maneuverability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	32
Turning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	31
Turning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	22
Wear Your Belt Correctly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	34
Winter Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	27
Meeting Snow Removal Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	28
Withdrawal of Parental Consent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	40
Work Zone
Channelizing Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	13
Construction and Maintenance Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	13
Flagpersons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	14
Flashing Arrow Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	13
Safety Tips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	14

-- 54 of 56 --

It is NDDOT’s policy that all employees have the right to work in an environment free of harassment.
An employee may discontinue service to a customer if the customer subjects the employee to conduct,
communication, or sexually explicit paraphernalia which may interfere with the employee’s work perfor-
mance or create a hostile, intimidating, or offensive work environment.
Under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and its related statutes and regulations, no person or groups
of persons shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, or income status, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination
under any and all programs, services, or activities administered by the North Dakota Department of
Transportation.

-- 55 of 56 --

www.dot.nd.gov

-- 56 of 56 --