OKLAHOMA
DRIVER
M A N U A L

-- 1 of 72 --

2
This handbook is written to help
you qualify for an Oklahoma Driver
License and become a safe driver.
It is not an official legal reference to
Oklahoma traffic laws. Still, it explains
in everyday language the knowledge
and skills you will need to drive safely
and legally on Oklahoma’s roads and
highways.
Good drivers know, understand and
respect the law and safe-driving
practices. They drive defensively and
courteously, always seeking to improve
their driving skills and habits.
If you are an Oklahoma resident, you
must have an Oklahoma Driver License
to operate a car, truck or motorcycle.
You must pass the required tests for
the type of vehicle you want to drive.
The tests will be given and evaluated
by a professional driver examiner from
Service Oklahoma, according to state
and national standards.
Your license to operate a motor vehicle
on Oklahoma’s streets and highways is a
privilege the state grants under certain
conditions. This privilege is granted only
to people who can show they have the
knowledge and the ability to operate
their vehicles safely. Abuse of the
privilege may result in the loss of your
Oklahoma Driver License.
FOREWORD
The Oklahoma Driver Manual presents instructions and general information relating to
the operation of motor vehicles in the state of Oklahoma. It is based on the laws
and regulations in effect at the time of publication.

-- 2 of 72 --

3
YOUR OKLAHOMA
DRIVER LICENSE
4 CHAPTER 1: How to Apply for Your
Oklahoma Driver License
Who Has to Have an Oklahoma Driver License? •
What to Bring with You • REAL ID • Types of Oklahoma
Driver Licenses • Parent-Taught Driver Education •
New Graduated Driver License (GDL) • What to Expect:
Vision Screening, Written Test, Driving Test • Where
to Get Your License • Organ Donor Option • Veteran
Logo Options • Sex or Violent Offender Registration •
License Responsibilities • Fees • Vehicle Inspection
13 CHAPTER 2: Your Driver License—
Restrictions and Renewals
Your Oklahoma Driving Privilege • If You Lose
Your License • License Expiration and Renewal •
Changing Your Name and Address • Probationary
Period • Unauthorized Driving • Restrictions and
Endorsements Placed on Your License
16 CHAPTER 3: Requirements for
Oklahoma Drivers
Registration, Tag and Title • Financial Responsibility
and Compulsory Liability Insurance —You Must be
Properly Insured • Mandatory Safety Requirements—
Seat Belts and Child Passenger Restraints • Child
Passenger Restraint System
RULES OF
THE ROAD
19 CHAPTER 4: Signs, Signals and Markings
Regulatory Signs • Warning Signs • Railroad Warning
Signs • Construction and Maintenance Signs • Guide
Signs • Service Signs • Traffic Signals • Pedestrian
Signals • Lane Control Signals • Pavement Markings
28 CHAPTER 5: Right-of-Way—When to Yield
You Must Yield to Children Playing in the Streets • You
Must Yield to Blind Persons • You Must Always Yield to
a Funeral Procession • Move Over Law or Bernardo's
Law • Right-of-Way at Intersections • Crossing an
Intersection • Yield Right-of-Way to a School or Church
Bus
31 CHAPTER 6: Lane Usage and Maneuvers
Changing Lanes • Expressway Driving • Passing •
Turning • Backing
TABLE OF CONTENTS
39 CHAPTER 7: Speed Limits
The Basic Speed Rule • Speed Limits • Road Rage •
Night Driving
41 CHAPTER 8: Stopping and Following
Stopping Distances • Braking • Stopping in Icy and
Rainy Conditions • Following • How to Avoid Rear-End
Collisions
45 CHAPTER 9: Parking
Parking • Parking on a Highway • Angle Parking •
Parallel Parking • Parking and Starting on a Hill •
Disabled Parking Placard • Unlawful Parking
DRIVING
SAFELY
49 CHAPTER 10: Sharing the Road —
Pedestrians • Bicycles • Motorcycles • Trucks • Trains •
Slow-Moving Vehicles
57 CHAPTER 11: Driving Tips
Using High and Low Headlight Beams Properly •
Using a Standard Transmission • Good Driving Posture
• Avoid Carbon Monoxide Poisoning • Driving Out
of State • Car Phone Safety • Pay Attention-Be Alert
Animals • Emergency Kit for Your Car • Traffic Facts •
Flood Dynamics
VIOLATIONS
AND PENALTIES
62 CHAPTER 12: Alcohol, Drugs and Driving —
Drugs Affect your Driving • Alcohol—Why Drinking
and Driving Is So Dangerous • Oklahoma Implied
Consent Laws • Criminal Evidence and Penalties •
Other Drugs and Driving • Zero Tolerance for Drivers
under 21 • Additional Penalties for Persons Under 18
67 CHAPTER 13: Violations and Penalties
Unlawful Use of License and/or Identification Card
• School Withdrawal • Driver’s Record • Compliance
Division • Probationary License • Mandatory
Revocation of Your License • Oklahoma Mandatory
Point System • Financial Responsibility—Liability
Insurance Requirements • Financial Responsibility—
Penalty for Not Having Insurance • Testing Locations

-- 3 of 72 --

4
CHAPTER 1
WHO HAS TO HAVE AN
OKLAHOMA DRIVER LICENSE?
All residents who operate a motor vehicle on
any Oklahoma street or highway.
■ 	Drivers with an out-of-state license must
apply for an Oklahoma Driver License
when they establish residency.
Upon establishing residency, your
vehicles must be registered in Oklahoma.
(Find your local Service Oklahoma
or licensed operator location on our
website*.) This may not apply to military
personnel and their spouses.
An Oklahoma License is NOT required for:
■ 	1. Nonresidents at least 16 years old who
are properly licensed to drive in their home
state or country.
■ 	2. Nonresidents on active duty with the
Armed Forces and their spouses and
children with valid licenses from their
home states.
■ 	3. Nonresident students enrolled at an
Oklahoma college or university and their
spouses and children with valid licenses
from their home states.
■ 	4. Anyone operating a farm tractor or
implement solely for farm/ranch activities
WHAT TO BRING WITH YOU
You must apply for your license in person at
a Driver Testing Facility operated by Service
Oklahoma (Find your local Service Oklahoma
or licensed operator location on our website*.)
Use this checklist for items to bring with you:
 1. Your full legal name will be used on
your license. A name change resulting
from marriage, court order or divorce
shall appear on the driver license or
identification card exactly
as stated on the marriage
certificate, court order or divorce decree.
 2. Bring proper identification. You are
required to present primary identification.
Notarized documents or photocopies are
not acceptable.
For your primary ID, you must show an
original or certified document such as:
▶ 	Certified U.S. birth certificate.
▶ 	A valid, unexpired U.S. Passport
▶ 	A valid Oklahoma Driver License, originally
issued after November 1, 2007.
▶ 	A valid Oklahoma Identification Card,
originally issued after November 1, 2007.
▶ 	Naturalization/Citizenship Certificate
▶ 	Consular Report of Birth Abroad.
▶ 	Unexpired Permanent Resident Card.
▶ 	Unexpired Employment Authorization
Card.
▶ 	Valid, unexpired foreign passport with a
valid U.S. visa and valid I-94 issued by DHS.
Other USCIS documents may be required
depending on your status (DS-2019, I-20,
etc.).
For Replacement Licenses – Applicants
requesting replacement of a lost, stolen or
mutilated Oklahoma Driver License or ID
card must furnish, at a minimum, a primary
form of identification.
Applicants for renewals with an expired
Oklahoma license or Oklahoma ID card
expired more than 1 year must provide a
document from primary identification list.
Name Change – Documentation required. If
a customer wishes to establish a name other
than the name that appears on a source
document, the customer must provide
evidence of the name change through the
presentation of documents issued by a
court, governmental body or other entity as
determined by Service Oklahoma. Service
How to Apply for Your
Oklahoma Driver License
Oklahoma will maintain
copies of the documentation
presented and maintain a
record of both the recorded
name and the name on
the source documents
as determined by the
Department.
Required documents include:
▶ 	Unexpired US Passport
▶ 	Certified Divorce Decree,
only if it states you were
granted a name change
▶ 	Certified Adoption decree
▶ 	Certified Name Change
Decree or
▶ 	Certified Birth Certificate,
pursuant to 63 OS., 1-315
▶ 	Certified Marriage License
or
▶ 	For a common law
marriage, “Affidavit of
Common Law Marriage”
containing the notarized
signatures of the husband
and wife, with another
primary source.
▶ 	If USCIS document is the
primary ID (including
1-551), applicant must
provide proof of name
change from USCIS
before any change will be
made.
OKLAHOMA
4d Lic. No.
USA
3 DOB
9 Class
9a End
12 Restr
1
2
8
11/16/1907
A13456789
NOT FOR FEDERAL
IDENTIFICATION
PURPOSES	DRIVER LICENSE
SERVICE OKLAHOMA
6015 N. CLASSEN BLVD.
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK 73118
D
NONE
NONE
* https://oklahoma.gov/
service/locations/driving-auto-
locations.html

-- 4 of 72 --

5
CHAPTER 1
Name Change – A name change resulting
from marriage, court order or divorce shall
appear on the driver license or identification
card exactly as stated on the marriage
certificate, court order or divorce decree. Legal
name changes should be reported to the
Social Security Administration before changes
are made on your license or identification card.
Titles or ecclesiastical names will not be
placed on a driver license or an identification
card.
■ 	If you are not a United States citizen,
you must present valid identification
and documentation that you are in the
United States legally. If you are a U.S.
citizen but born outside of the United
States, including military bases, you must
provide proof of citizenship pursuant to
the laws of the United States. No license
shall be issued to any immigrant whose
documentation indicates the immigrant
is a visitor or is not eligible to establish
residency. A receipt for an application
for presence in the U.S. is NOT proof of
legal presence.
 3. Bring valid proof of auto liability
insurance if you’re taking the driving
test.
 4. If you have health or physical
conditions that might impair your
driving ability, you may be required to
have a doctor’s statement about your
condition.
 5. Provide your Social Security Number.
This number will not appear on your
license.
 6. Bring public school driver’s education
completion certificate or a certificate of
completion of driver’s education from
a commercial school or a parent-taught
driver’s education course approved by
Service Oklahoma. If proof of driver’s
education completion is not presented,
additional restrictions may be imposed.
REAL ID
REAL ID is a federal security credential added to State-
Issued Driver Licenses and Identification Cards that
establishes a minimum security standard required for
specific activities.
Beginning May 7, 2025, a REAL ID License or Identification
Card or valid federal identification document (i.e., U.S.
Passport) will be required to:
■ 	Board a domestic flight
■ 	Visit military bases or specific federal buildings
■ 	Enter nuclear power plants
Our REAL ID checklist will provide you with the documents required for your visit.
Visit our web page for more information.
https://oklahoma.gov/service/sokonline/online-real-id-checklist.html
OKLAHOMA
4d Lic. No.
USA
3 DOB
9 Class
	9a End
	12 Restr
1
2
8
11/16/1907
A13456789
DRIVER LICENSE
SERVICE OKLAHOMA
	6015 N. CLASSEN BLVD.
	OKLAHOMA CITY, OK 73118
D
NONE
	NONE

-- 5 of 72 --

6
CHAPTER 1
TYPE
MINIMUM AGE 	TYPE OF VEHICLE AND REQUIREMENTS
Class A, B or C
Commercial
License
18
Single or combination vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 26,001 lbs. or more (does not
include farm vehicles); a vehicle transporting hazardous materials in amounts requiring a placard; or a
vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
REQUIREMENTS: If you will be driving any one of these vehicles, you must study the Commercial Driver
Manual to prepare for the driving test. The new Entry-Level Driver Training (ELDT) regulations require
that all entry-level drivers of commercial motor vehicles (CMVs) receive training from a provider listed on
FMCSA’s Training Provider Registry. Visit this FMCSA web page for more details.
https://tpr.fmcsa.dot.gov/content/Resources/ELDT-Applicability-Factsheet_rev_508.pdf
Class A, B or C
Commercial
Learner Permit
18
REQUIREMENTS: You must pass all the required examinations for an Oklahoma Class D license and have
passed all parts of the tests for a Class A, B or C license except the Skills Tests. The applicant must be able to
read and understand English. You must be accompanied by a licensed driver 21 or older, who is licensed for
the classes of vehicles being driven, including all required endorsements. It is valid for 180 days and may be
renewed for an additional 180 days. You will be eligible for Skills Tests 14 days after obtaining the permit. You
can take the test only three times after date of eligibility. After that, you can take the test only once every 30
days.
Class D 18+
18
Cars, vans, trucks under 26,001 lbs. (GVWR), recreational vehicles, fire truck. Driver education not required.
REQUIREMENTS: A Learner Permit is valid only while a licensed driver, 21 or older, sits beside the driver. The
driving test can be taken 30 days after the permit is issued. You can only take the driving test three times
after the date of eligibility. After three times, you can take the test once every 30 days.
If you choose to go from the written test to a Class D license, you can take the driving test as early as the
next business day. You can only take the driving test three times. After three times, you must possess a valid
Oklahoma Learner permit for 30 days before you are eligible to re-test. You can take the test once every 30
days.
Class D
License
16
16 ½
16 – Cars, vans, trucks under 26,001 lbs. (GVWR), recreational vehicles, fire trucks. Must show completion
certificate from an approved driver education course.
16 1/2 – Driver education completion not required.
REQUIREMENTS: You must pass the knowledge test, driving test and vision screening. Your physical
condition must meet the required standards. You must be able to read and understand road signs. If you
are transferring a license from another state, see Table 2, page 10.
Class D
Learner
Permit
15 1/2
You must be taking or have passed an approved driver education course and show a completed driver
education certificate, a contract with a commercial driver education school or the notarized driver
education form from a public school. If participating in the Parent-Taught Driver Education Program, you
must bring the SOK-approved Parent-Taught Affidavit and a purchase receipt for the course.
Class D
Learner
Permit
16
You must qualify for a regular Class D license, except for the driving test. Driver education completion not
required.
REQUIREMENTS: A Learner Permit is valid only while a licensed driver, 21 or older, sits beside the driver.
The driving test can be taken six months after the permit is issued. The “Licensed Driver in the Front Seat”
restriction will be removed when you pass the driving test. You can take the test only three times after the
date of eligibility. After that, you can take the test only once every 30 days.
TABLE 1—TYPES OF LICENSES
You must show proper identification each time you apply for a test, retest, replacement license or ID card.

-- 6 of 72 --

7
CHAPTER 1
TYPE
MINIMUM AGE 	TYPE OF VEHICLE AND REQUIREMENTS
Motorcycle
Endorsement
16
Added to Class A, B, C or D license.
REQUIREMENTS: You must first have a valid Oklahoma Driver License, then pass the Motorcycle
Endorsement Test. Effective August 26, 2016, those under 18 must complete a certified state-approved
motorcycle basic rider course.
Motorcycle
License
Only
14
Study the MOTORCYCLE LICENSE MANUAL in addition to this manual.
https://msf-usa.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/motorcycle-operator-manual.pdf
REQUIREMENTS: You must meet the vision, written and skills test requirements. On the driving test, you
must prove your ability to operate a cycle safely. This license is restricted to a motor scooter or motorcycle
with a piston displacement of no more than 300 cc (cubic centimeters). You may ride only between
the hours of 4:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. You cannot carry a passenger. If your motorcycle is over 150cc but
not larger than 300cc, you may drive the posted speed limit, with the exception you may not drive on a
highway with a posted minimum speed limit, such as an interstate or turnpike. These restrictions are lifted
at age 16 once the “motorcycle only” restriction is removed. Effective August 26, 2016, those under 18 must
complete a certified state-approved motorcycle basic rider course.
Motorcycle
License
Permit
14
SOK may waive the knowledge and skills test for a motorcycle if applicant shows proof that they have
successfully completed a Motorcycle Safety Foundation Rider Course.
A helmet is required for anyone under 18 years of age.
Study the MOTORCYCLE LICENSE MANUAL in addition to this manual.
https://msf-usa.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/motorcycle-operator-manual.pdf
You must see a driver license examiner to have a #9 restriction added to your motorcycle driver license
at the age of 16 years. (15 1/2 if receiving instruction in an approved driver education course).
REQUIREMENTS: You must be receiving instruction from a parent, legal guardian or any person 21 or
older who has a valid Oklahoma Driver License with a motorcycle endorsement added and who has
visual contact with the operator. You must meet the requirements for a regular driver license. The learner
restriction can be removed 30 days after the permit is issued. Effective August 26, 2016, under 18 must also
complete a certified state approved motorcycle basic rider course.
14-15 year olds: Learner Restriction is required. Your application must be signed by a custodial parent
or legal guardian who must agree that the conditions imposed upon the license will be complied with
and who must also be willing to assume financial and legal responsibility if you violate the law, damage
property or cause personal injury while riding your cycle.
Identification
Card
None
Card is to be used for identification only.
REQUIREMENTS: You must be an Oklahoma resident and provide the same type of identification required
for a driver license. You must complete the application in person at a Driver License Exam location. You
must have a custodial parent or legal guardian sign the consent form if you are under 18.
For more information regarding the types of Class D driver licenses and ID cards and their requirements, visit our web page.
https://oklahoma.gov/service/popular-services/new-dl.html
Information regarding the different types of commercial driver licenses (CDL) and their requirements is available on the web page.
https://oklahoma.gov/service/all-pages/cdl-first-time-applicants.html

-- 7 of 72 --

8
CHAPTER 1
PARENT-TAUGHT
DRIVER EDUCATION
On November 1, 2001, Oklahoma enacted
Parent-Taught Driver Education. The program
is designed to provide driver education to
students who are unable to receive it in school
or through a commercial driving school.
Oklahoma has enjoyed the benefits of driver
education in conventional school settings for
years and now offers alternative sources of
education to target more young drivers.
Listed below are some questions and answers
about Oklahoma’s Parent-Taught Driver
Education.
Q 	What is Parent-Taught Driver Education?
A 	Parent-Taught is an alternative to
conventional driver education that is
recognized by Service Oklahoma. It is
offered as a correspondence study through
approved Parent-Taught Driver Education
Providers.
Q 	Is this type of driver education free?
A 	No. Approved Vendors charge a fee for the
curriculum.
Q 	Is Parent-Taught Driver Education a
faster way to complete driver education?
A 	While Parent-Taught Driver Education
is designed for students to work at their
own pace, it is not designed to be a fast-
track way to complete driver education.
Students are required to complete 30
hours of classroom training and 55 hours
of actual behind-the-wheel training, which
is all programmed into the curriculum of
approved providers.
Q 	Should I take Parent-Taught Driver Ed or
go through a Commercial School?
A 	Parent-Taught Driver Education is the
newest of three forms of driver education
in Oklahoma. If you do not attend a public
school or there are no commercial driving
schools in your area, Parent-Taught
Education may be right for you.
NEW GRADUATED
DRIVER LICENSE (GDL)
House Bill 1599 requires teens to apply for the
license which restricts their driving time to the
hours of 5 a.m. to 10 p.m. with the exceptions
for driving to work, school, church or related
activities or if a licensed driver over 21 years of
age is seated next to the teenager. The bill also
prevents teenage drivers from chauffeuring
their friends around town, limiting teens with
a restricted license to one passenger unless all
passengers live in the same household, unless
a licensed driver over 21 years of age is seated
next to the teenager. For more information
regarding Graduated Driver Licensing, visit
our web page. https://oklahoma.gov/service/
popular-services/teen-driving.html
Listed below are some questions and answers
about Oklahoma’s Graduated Driver License
law and how it will affect young people under
the age of 17.
Q 	What is GDL?
A 	GDL stands for Graduated Driver License.
The GDL program gradually phases in
driving privileges for new teen drivers as
they gain experience behind the wheel.
Q 	Why do we need GDL?
A 	Because Oklahoma’s teenage drivers have
more crashes than any other age group.
This is one reason insurance premiums are
so high for teen drivers. During their first
year of driving, 25 percent of 16-year olds
either receive a traffic ticket or are involved
in a crash.
Q 	Are other states passing GDL too?
A 	Yes. All 50 states have some version of
Graduated Driver License as established by
their laws.
Q 	What happens if you break the rules and
are convicted of a moving violation?
A 	You will remain at your current GDL level
(learner or intermediate) until 6 months
from the date of conviction has elapsed.
Q 	Does the driver education course I take
have to be given by a high school?
A 	No. You may take any driver education
course that has been certified by Service
Oklahoma, including parent-taught driver
education and commercial driving schools.

-- 8 of 72 --

9
CHAPTER 1
WHAT TO EXPECT
The law says that you must pass certain tests to show that you can drive a car or motorcycle
legally and safely before you can get your Oklahoma Driver License. You apply for your license
and take your tests at a Driver Testing Facility operated by Service Oklahoma. For the Class D
license, there are three tests: the vision screening, the written test and the driving test for cars
and motorcycles. You may not be required to take all three. See Table 2 page 10.
You are not required to pay any money to take the tests. When you successfully
meet all the requirements, the driver examiner will collect the fees and issue your
temporary paper license or identification card. The plastic card will arrive in the mail
at the address you provided. If you have been issued a Social Security Number, you must
know your number when you apply for an Oklahoma Driver License or I.D. card. This
number will not appear on your license or I.D. card.
VISION SCREENING—Your vision will be checked. You may be required to wear glasses
or contact lenses to drive safely.
WRITTEN TEST—The questions for a Class D license test will be taken from this manual.
You will be asked questions about Oklahoma traffic laws, safe driving practices and drug
and alcohol laws/effects. You should also know local traffic laws for your city or town (check
with your local police department). For a Class A, B, C license or a Motorcycle Endorsement,
also study the proper supplemental manual. An oral test will be given on request (an
appointment may be required).
If you fail the written test, by law you must wait at least one day before retesting.
DRIVING TEST—You must show that you can drive legally and safely on streets and
highways. It’s very important to have proper training and learn safe driving skills before you
try to take the driving test. To qualify for the test:
■ 	You must pass the vision screening and the written test.
■ 	The car you are using must have a valid tag and you must show the security
verification form. The car must be in proper mechanical condition.
■ 	No pets or additional people can be in the car with you and the examiner.
■ 	Effective Nov. 1, 2012, any certified Driver Education instructor, who is currently employed
by any school district or commercial driver training school, can apply to Service Oklahoma
to become a designated examiner to administer the skills portion of the driving test. Anyone
who has a valid Oklahoma Learner Permit may choose to take their driving skills test from
one of the these designated examiners for a fee or you may still take your test from Service
Oklahoma at no charge. For a list of approved designated examiners, please visit our Driver
License Services web page. https://oklahoma.gov/service/all-pages/drive-schools.html
The examiner will tell you where to drive and what driving maneuvers to perform. You
must show that you can:
■ 	Control the car or motorcycle.
■ 	Properly perform basic maneuvers such as turning right and left, backing, parking on
a hill, parallel parking, etc.
■ 	Use signals and drive in the proper lane.
■ 	Understand and obey traffic signs, markings and signals.
■ 	Properly apply the rules of right-of-way.
■ 	Carefully observe and correctly respond to other vehicles and pedestrians.
Skills test will not be conducted when roads are considered by the examiner to be slick or
hazardous. 260:135-5-42 (c)(2).

-- 9 of 72 --

10
CHAPTER 1
TABLE 2—TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CLASS D LICENSES
R=Required | 	D=At the discretion of the examiner | 	N=None
APPLICANT 	VISION 	WRITTEN 	DRIVING 	COMMENTS
New driver, age 16
and up
R 	R 	R 	A license issued to a person under
18 is considered probationary. See
page 13.
Learning Permit, age
15½ and up
R 	R 	g 	Must be 16 years old and have had
your permit for at least 6 months
to take the driving test.
Motorcycle, age 16
and up
R 	R 	R
Motorcycle, age 14-15 	R 	R 	g 	Must have had your permit for at
least 30 days to take the driving
test.
Renewal, expired less
than 3 years – more
than 30 days
N 	N 	N 	Take your expired Oklahoma
license and proof of legal presence
to an authorized licensed operator
or examiner.
Renewal, expired
more than 3 years
R 	R 	R
Out-of-State Transfer
of a valid Class D
license
R 	D 	D 	If you have a valid license in your
possession or on file, the written
and driving test may be waived if
department standards are met.
Identification Card 	N 	N 	N 	Requires same proof of ID as a
license.
Reasons for Failing the Driving Test—You can fail the driving test for too many errors, dangerous
driving, law violations, traffic collision or refusing to perform a maneuver.
After the test, the examiner will explain any driving errors you made. If you failed the test, the
examiner will tell you when you can retake the test.
WHERE TO GET
YOUR LICENSE
Driver license tests are
available in many cities
throughout Oklahoma.
To locate a Service
Oklahoma or licensed
operator location near
you, please visit https://
oklahoma.gov/service/
locations/driving-auto-
locations.html
ORGAN DONOR OPTION
There is a critical shortage of organs and tissues for those who need organ and/ or
tissue transplants. When you are issued your Oklahoma Driver License or Identification
Card, you will be given the opportunity to become an organ/tissue donor. If you wish
to become a donor, you will need to check the YES box on the signature pad. If you
do not want to be added to the donor registry, you will need to check the NO box. For
additional information, you many contact LifeShare of Oklahoma at www.lifeshareok.
org or 1-888.580.5680.
Checking the YES box will cause a red heart ♥ to be printed on the face of the Driver
License or Identification Card. This is a legal document and can be the only document
required to authorize the recovery and transplantation of your organs and/or tissue if
you should become an eligible donor. You are encouraged to inform your family of your decision
to be a donor if you checked the YES box, although it is not required.
OKLAHOMA
4d Lic. No.
USA
3 DOB
9 Class
9a End
12 Restr
1
2
8
11/16/1907
A13456789
DRIVER LICENSE
SERVICE OKLAHOMA
6015 N. CLASSEN BLVD.
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK 73118
D
NONE
NONE

-- 10 of 72 --

11
CHAPTER 2
VETERAN LOGO OPTION
As a way to honor and recognize the veterans who have served
our country, SB138 authorized the creation of a logo that
serves as a notation of veteran’s status on a driver license or
identification card. The logo is an American flag with the word
“Veteran” underneath it. Anyone requesting the logo must show
proof of present or past military service by presenting one of the
following documents to any licensed operator:
■ 	A valid Uniformed Services Identity card;
■ 	A United States Department of Defense Form (DD)214, (DD)215 or a World War II discharge
document WD AGO Form or NavPers Form that shows a discharge status of “honorable” or
“general under honorable conditions”;
■ 	A United States Department of Veterans Affairs photo identification card; or
■ 	An Oklahoma Army or Air National Guard NGB Form 22.
There is no cost for the logo but you will have to pay the cost of an original, replacement or
renewal license or ID card.
LICENSE
RESPONSIBILITIES
■ 	Write down your driver
license number and
memorize it.
■ 	Always carry your license
with you when you drive.
■ 	You are required by law to
show it to a trooper, police
officer, sheriff or judge
when asked.
■ 	You must show your license
to anyone with whom you
are involved in a collision.
FEES
The examiner will advise you
of the fees due when you have
passed all required tests. The
schedule on the left will help
you determine what the fees
will be. All fees can be paid
at Service Oklahoma or at a
licensed operator when the
license is issued.
You must show primary
identification to apply
for an original Oklahoma
Driver License or for
retesting, license
renewal, identification
card or replacement
license.
TABLE 3 – FOR A FOUR-YEAR LICENSE APPLICATION
AND LICENSE FEES (EFFECTIVE 11-01-2013)
TYPE OF LICENSE 	APPLICATION
FEE
LICENSE
FEE
TOTAL
FEES
RETEST
FEE
REPLACEMENT
FEE
Class A License 	$25 	$56.50 	$81.50 	$4 	$25
Learner Permit 	$25 	$56.50 	$81.50 	$4 	$25
Class B License 	$15 	$56.50 	$71.50 	$4 	$25
Learner Permit 	$15 	$56.50 	$71.50 	$4 	$25
Class C License 	$15 	$46.50 	$61.50 	$4 	$25
Learner Permit 	$15 	$46.50 	$61.50 	$4 	$25
Class D License 	$ 4 	$38.50 	$42.50 	$4 	$25
Learner Permit 	$ 4 	$38.50 	$42.50 	$4 	$25
Prorated: 	Age 62 	$ 4 	$21.25 	$25.25 	$4 	$25
Age 63 	$ 4 	$17.50 	$21.50 	$4 	$25
Age 64 	$ 4 	$13.75 	$17.75 	$4 	$25
Age 65 	$ 4 	-0- 	$ 4 	$4 	-0-
Motorcycle
Endorsement
$ 4 	$25 	$29 	$4 	$25
Motorcycle License 	$ 4 	$38.50 	$42.50 	$4 	$25
Motorcycle
Learner Permit
$ 4 	$38.50 	$42.50 	$4 	$25
Lost License 	-0- 	$25 	$25 	-0- 	$25
Identification Card 	-0- 	$25 	$25 	-0- 	$25
Identification Card 65+ 	-0- 	-0- 	-0- 	-0- 	-0-

-- 11 of 72 --

12
CHAPTER 1
Notes
VEHICLE INSPECTION
All vehicles must be equipped as required by Chapter 12 of Title 47 of
the Oklahoma State Statutes. Officers may inspect a vehicle and its
equipment according to 47 O.S. §13-102.
The following items will be inspected and must be in good
working order:
▶ Lights: headlights, taillights, brake lights, turn signals, parking
lights, plate lights, reflectors
▶ Valid Oklahoma license plate
▶ Rearview mirror
▶ If your vehicle is required by federal law to have the third brake
light, it must be in working order at the time of testing.
▶ Brakes
▶ Horn
▶ Exhaust system
▶ Windshield and glass
▶ Windshield wiper
▶ Insurance verification form
▶ Tires
▶ Seat belts (vehicles after 1965)
SOK 23-044-45
Before Your Drive Test,
your car must pass the following checklist:
▶ License Plate - Must have valid license plate.
▶ Lights - Must have working brakes/turn signals, including the
	third brake lights (cars since 1986, trucks since 1994). No lens
may be covered in any way by tape of any kind, colored or clear.
▶ Windshield - Cannot have multiple
	cracks or other damage. Tint must meet
Title 47. No tint is permitted more than 5
inches from the windshield or below the
AS-1 line located on windshield.
▶ Tires - Must have a minimum tread depth
	2/32”, no ply or cord exposed in the tread.
No bulges/bumps. Use the penny test to
check depth.
▶ Horn - Must be audible at 200 feet.
▶ Brakes - Must be in proper working order.
▶ Front door handles
 - Must operate from both inside and
	outside with normal effort.
▶ Seatbelts - Must be in proper working order.
▶ Mirrors - Must have left outside AND either center inside or
	right outside mirrors.
You also must have a current
insurance verification form,
which can not exclude the driver.
TIRES ARE FINE
NEED NEW TIRES
AS-1 Line
A S1

-- 12 of 72 --

13
CHAPTER 2
YOUR OKLAHOMA
DRIVING PRIVILEGE
You do not own your license. It is the property
of the State of Oklahoma and can be denied,
canceled, suspended or revoked if you do not
abide by the laws of the State of Oklahoma.
Driving is a privilege you have earned by
passing the required tests and paying the
application fees. Your driver license is your
legal permission to drive a car or motorcycle on
streets and highways in Oklahoma, the United
States and many places throughout the world.
Take good care of your license and always carry
it with you when you drive.
IF YOU LOSE YOUR LICENSE
If your license is lost, destroyed or so damaged
that the information is not readable, contact a
licensed operator, your local driver examiner or
apply online for a replacement license. Only a
valid Oklahoma license can be replaced.
LICENSE EXPIRATION
AND RENEWAL
Your license can be issued for either 4 or 8
years from the month in which you paid your
fee for your license. It expires on the last day
of the month. You can renew it up to 1 year
before the expiration date.
Non-citizens visit a Service Oklahoma Driver
License Examiner for an original, renewal or
replacement driver license. They must show
all immigration documents each time they
appear. The license's expiration will coincide
with the dates of the immigration documents.
Exception: legal permanent residents are
allowed to renew or replace a license and must
present a valid permanent resident card with
any SOK location or licensed operator.
You can renew online. Military personnel
stationed outside Oklahoma
do not have to renew until 60 days after they
return to Oklahoma, but they may renew by
mail if they wish.
If your license is expired over 1 year, you must
visit a Service Oklahoma location or a licensed
operator location who is approved to accept
a certified birth certificate or United States
passport.
CHANGING YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS
Your correct name and address on your driver
license and on file with Service Oklahoma
ensures the state can reach your family if you
are in a collision. It also ensures that the state
can reach you by mail if needed.
If legal notification cannot be delivered to you
because your correct address is not on file, you
could lose your license.
Required by Law—When you move, you must
notify Service Oklahoma within 10 days, either
by reporting to your local licensed operator,
online at our website or by writing to:
Service Oklahoma
P.O. Box 11415
Oklahoma City, OK 73136
When you change your name, you must
present a certified document, such as a
marriage license or court order, proving the
change.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
Until you are 18, your license is probationary
(you are in a trial period to show you can drive
safely and legally). Service Oklahoma may
cancel or suspend your license for any unlawful
act, negligence or misconduct while driving.
Your Driver License
Restrictions and Renewals
OKLAHOMA
4d Lic. No.
USA
3 DOB
9 Class
9a End
12 Restr
1
2
8
11/16/1907
A13456789
NOT FOR FEDERAL
IDENTIFICATION
PURPOSES	DRIVER LICENSE
SERVICE OKLAHOMA
6015 N. CLASSEN BLVD.
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK 73118
D
NONE
NONE
THE LAW SAYS
As required by law, legal
notice is served to you
by first-class mail at the
address of record.
Failure to notify Service
Oklahoma when you
change your name or
address can result in
the suspension of your
license without your
receiving notice of the
suspension.
UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING
■ 	It is illegal to drive without
a license.
■ 	Even if you have a licensed
driver with you, you are
breaking the law if you
don’t have a license or
Learner Permit. Both you
and the person who lets
you drive the car can be
arrested.
■ 	It is illegal for parents to
allow their children to
drive without a Learner
Permit or driver license.
■ 	It is illegal to let another
person drive your vehicle
or a vehicle that you are
responsible for unless that
person has a valid driver
license.

-- 13 of 72 --

14
CHAPTER 2
RESTRICTIONS AND ENDORSEMENTS PLACED ON YOUR LICENSE
Restrictions or endorsements are meant to improve the safety of your driving and help you be a
better driver. They are not meant to interfere with your driving.
An "A" usually means you are qualified to use a certain type of vehicle, such as a motorcycle or a
truck carrying hazardous materials.
A restriction refers to conditions that affect your safety as a driver. Restrictions are listed as a
code on your license and explained on the back of the license.
PENALTIES FOR
DRIVING WITH-
OUT A VALID
LICENSE
On conviction, a fine of
up to $500 or 6 months
in jail or both.
PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATING A
RESTRICTION
On conviction, a fine of
up to $500, 6 months in
jail or both.
B =Corrective lenses. For people who
must wear glasses or contacts to meet
the vision requirements.
F = Left outside rear vision mirror. For
people with limited vision in the left
eye or with limited hearing.
2 = Restriction B or F.
4 = Automatic transmission. For people
whose physical condition requires an
automatic transmission to handle the
vehicle safely.
5 = Turn indicators and power steering or
steering knob. For people with limited
use of either hand.
6 = Food, fruit or candy within reach of
the driver. For people with insulin-
dependent diabetes.
7 = Adequate artificial limbs.
8 = Detailed restrictions on license.
Refers to any other special conditions
that might be required.
9 = Accompanied by licensed driver 21
years of age or older in the front seat.
For people learning to drive.
0 = Motorcycle only. Riders under 16
are restricted to a motor scooter or
motorcycle with piston displacement
of no more than 300cc, to ride only
between 4:30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. You
cannot carry a passenger. If the motor
scooter or motorcycle is less than
150cc, there is an additional restriction
that you may not exceed 35 mph and
cannot ride on a highway where a
minimum speed limit is established
and posted. These restrictions are
automatically lifted at 16. However,
a helmet is required for anyone
under 18 years of age. (Also see the
MOTORCYCLE LICENSE MANUAL
https://msf-usa.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/02/motorcycle-operator-
manual.pdf)
Restriction “A” = Motorcycle learner.
For people receiving instruction from
a parent, legal guardian or any person
21 or older, who has a valid Oklahoma
Driver License with a motorcycle
endorsement added and who has
visual contact with the operator.
Restriction “T” = Graduated driver license
Driving allowed from 5 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Unless for activities related to
school, church or work or any time
accompanied by licensed driver at
least 21 years old. One passenger or
only people who live in the driver’s
home or any passenger if accompanied
by licensed driver at least 21 years
old in the front passenger seat. No G
restriction for ages 18 or older.
Other endorsements and restrictions
apply to commercial licenses.
Removing restrictions or adding
endorsements. When a restriction is
no longer needed, such as a learner
or physical restriction or if it is in error,
contact a driver license examiner at a
Service Oklahoma location.
To add an endorsement, you must see
a driver license examiner and pass the
required tests.
RESTRICTION CODES

-- 14 of 72 --

15
CHAPTER 2
Notes

-- 15 of 72 --

16
CHAPTER 3
REGISTRATION, TAG AND TITLE
The car you are driving must have a current license tag, registration and title. When you register your vehicle at a designated Service
Oklahoma location or a SOK licensed operator, which means you have paid the required taxes and fees, you will get a new license
tag or a current-year sticker to put on you present tag. If you buy or sell a vehicle, you must go to a designated Service Oklahoma
location or a SOK licensed operator to transfer the title in order to show the proper ownership. Registration and title transfer fees
depend on the age, type and value of the vehicle.
Requirements for
Oklahoma Drivers
FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY—
PENALTY FOR NOT
HAVING LIABILITY
INSURANCE
A conviction of failure
to comply with the
Compulsory Insurance
Law or failure to produce
proof of insurance to a
law enforcement officer
or Service Oklahoma
representative upon
request can result in—
A fine of up to $250.00,
30 days in jail or both •
Suspension of license
and registration.
ALL
CORRESPONDENCE
FROM SERVICE
OKLAHOMA IS
SENT TO YOU AT
THE ADDRESS WE
HAVE ON FILE.
Service Oklahoma
must have your current
address on file. Failure
to keep an updated
address could result in a
suspension without your
knowledge. Keep your
license—keep in touch!
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
AND COMPULSORY LIABILITY
INSURANCE—YOU MUST BE
PROPERLY INSURED
Oklahoma has strict laws about having valid
auto liability insurance. “Liability” means that
as a driver, you are legally and financially
responsible for injury, death or property
damages caused by you or your vehicle in a
collision. All Oklahoma drivers and/or vehicle
owners are required by law to carry the
minimum limits of liability for this state:
■ $25,000 for injury or death of one person
■ $50,000 per accident
■ $25,000 of property damage
At the time of a collision or a traffic stop, the
driver must show a current security verification
form (proof of liability insurance) to the law
enforcement officer. The vehicle owner’s
insurance company or an individual’s non-
owner insurance policy will provide the proper
security verification form.
Collisions—Service Oklahoma will suspend
the driver license of the uninsured driver and/
or owner of a vehicle involved in a collision
where there is any injury or property damage
of $300 or more.
Compulsory Liability Insurance—If you
receive a ticket for failing to have proof of
liability insurance, the courts will notify Service
Oklahoma. Your driver license and your vehicle
tags will be suspended.
Carry your proof of liability insurance
(security verification form) in your car—By
law; you must show it to a law enforcement
officer or Service Oklahoma representative
when asked. If you are in a collision, you must
show your proof of liability insurance to the
other driver and the other people involved. You
should write down the information from the
other driver’s security verification form and the
driver’s complete name, driver license number
and date of birth for driver and owner for your
own protection.
Counterfeit or Fraudulent Security
Verification—To fraudulently create,
manufacture or counterfeit a security
verification form may result in a felony
conviction which carries severe penalties in the
form of both fines and/or imprisonment.
Simple possession of a fraudulent or
counterfeit security verification form may
result in a misdemeanor charge being filed
against you. A conviction on this charge
may result in a fine of up to $250.00 and
a mandatory suspension of your driving
privilege and vehicle registration. You may only
present a security verification form for proof
of insurance which has been issued by an
insurance company or agent.
TIP: It is wise to verify that a current insurance
verification form is in any vehicle you drive,
regardless of who owns it, because you may
be arrested and have your driving privileges
suspended if you are operating it without
insurance.
APR	OKLAHOMA 	OKLAHOMA
SOK 	123OKLAHOMA.GOV/SERVICE
2323
O
K
L
A
230000000

-- 16 of 72 --

17
CHAPTER 3
MANDATORY SAFETY REQUIREMENTS—
SEAT BELTS AND CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS
Every driver and front-seat passenger must wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat
belt system. The seat belt must be factory-installed and meet federal safety standards.
In a collision:
▶ Seat belts reduce the force of impact against the vehicle’s interior.
▶ You can be thrown out of the vehicle. Seat belts keep you inside the vehicle and safer.
▶ Seat belts can keep fender benders from becoming major collisions because you are still in a
position to control your vehicle.
▶ If all passengers are buckled in, there is much less danger of being thrown forward or from
the vehicle.
▶ Small children are especially prone to injury or death and must be protected: Sit them in the
back seat with seat belts fastened or strapped into a child passenger restraint system.
CHILD PASSENGER
RESTRAINT SYSTEM
Every driver, when transporting a child under 8 years of age in a motor vehicle operated on
the roadways, streets or highways of this state, must provide for the protection of said child by
properly using a child passenger restraint system.
A child, at least four 4 years of age, shall be properly secured in a child passenger restraint system.
The child passenger restraint system must be rear-facing until the child reaches 2 years of age or
until the child reaches the weight or height limit of the system as allowed by the manufacturer.
The infant or child safety restraint system must meet federal standards for crash-tested restraint
systems as set by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
A child at least four 4 years of age but younger than 8 years of age, if not taller than 4 feet 9
inches in height, shall be properly secured by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat
belt.
Small children are especially at risk in a collision—even in sudden stops. No child should be
allowed to ride without being restrained, to stand on the car seat or on the floor in front of the
instrument panel where the head can be hit during a sudden stop or crushed in a collision.
Studies show that an adult in the front seat holding an
infant CANNOT prevent the baby from going through the
windshield on impact.
Passenger Air Bags—The explosive power of an airbag
has killed children and elderly adults under 5 feet tall. If
your car is equipped with an airbag on the passenger side,
the Highway Safety Administration recommends putting
children under 12 in the back seat.
Even without airbags, the back seat is at least 26 percent
safer than the front seat because most serious crashes
involve the front of the vehicle.
HELPFUL HINT!
Before driving, we
suggest a friendly family
meeting at home where
you explain to children
why the back seat is
always reserved for
them and why we all
buckle up for safety. This
will avoid arguments
when getting into the
family car.
BUCKLE UP!
IT'S THE LAW.

-- 17 of 72 --

18
CHAPTER 3
Notes

-- 18 of 72 --

19
CHAPTER 4
STOP: RED OCTAGON—
Come to a complete stop
at the intersection. You
must stop before the
pedestrian crosswalk,
even if it isn’t marked.
Stay stopped until
the way is clear in all
directions.
4-WAY or ALL-WAY:
RED RECTANGLE—
Added below a stop
sign, means all traffic
approaching this
intersection must stop.
YIELD: RED AND WHITE
TRIANGLE—Slow down
and be ready to stop if
needed. Let oncoming
vehicles pass before
crossing or entering the
flow of traffic.
“NO”: RED CIRCLE WITH
A LINE THROUGH IT—
Means “DO NOT” or “NOT
ALLOWED.”
TRAFFIC SIGNS give you information about the road, the highway system, traffic flow and the
local regulations and laws. They warn you about hazards, identify your route and direct the speed
and movement of traffic. They provide directions and let you know about places of interest, from
the huge overhead green interstate signs to the little blue rectangles that direct you to a library or
hospital.
The shapes and colors of traffic signs have specific meanings and you should be able to recognize
them immediately. Even if a stop sign is damaged or blocked by dirt or snow, you know by the
octagonal shape and red color that you must stop.
Learn the standard colors and shapes, so you know what a sign means, even at a distance. For
example, a rectangle is always a regulatory sign, telling you about laws and regulations or giving
you instructions. Speed limit signs are regulatory.
In accordance with 47 O.S. §11-207, obstructing or damaging roads, defacing, damaging,
destroying or removing any traffic control device, road sign board, guide sign or signpost is a
misdemeanor. If the action results in personal injury to or death of any person, the person or
persons responsible for such action shall be guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 2 years and a fine of $1,000.00 or both such fine and imprisonment.
Signs, Signals and Markings
YIELD
Stop or
“Not Allowed”
Construction
Maintenace
Warning
Guide 	Driver Guidance
Recreation,
Cultural,
Historical
General
Warning
High Emphasis
Schools, Pedestrian,
Bicycling
Regulations &
Instructions
RED 	ORANGE 	YELLOW FLORESCENT
YELLOW GREEN
WHITE/BLACK 	GREEN 	BLUE 	BROWN
GUIDE
YIELD
SCHOOL
NO
PASSING
GUIDE
STOP
WARNING
Hazard Ahead
SET RULES

-- 19 of 72 --

20
CHAPTER 4
International
Symbols for the
Disabled
Practice driving courtesy
and obey the law. Do
not park or stop your
vehicle in a parking space
reserved for disabled
people unless you have a
disabled license plate or
disability placard.
CENTER
LANE
ONLY
PARKING
HANDICAPPED
REGULATORY SIGNS—
BLACK AND WHITE RECTANGLES
REGULATORY SIGNS tell you what you must do and what you must not do. They
direct and control or “regulate” traffic for everyone’s safety. You are required to
obey them just like other traffic laws. When you see the “School Zone” sign, you
must reduce your speed to the limit shown when the yellow light is flashing.
Watch carefully for children and be ready to stop.
The signs shown here are the most common regulatory signs. There are many
more and they can be found on all roadways, from turnpikes to unpaved county
roads. When you see rectangular signs, always obey them for your own safety and
the safety of others.
Lane 1 	Lane 2
OR
Lane 1 	Lane 2
Lane 1 must go left.
Lane 2 is optional, either
left or straight ahead.
Lane 1 must go straight
ahead. Lane 2 is
optional, either right or
straight ahead.
Must turn left. 	No turns from
this lane.
Enter this lane
only to make a left
turn. You must not
pass in this lane.
No right turn.
Keep right of an
object or center
divider.
No U-turn. Don’t turn
around in the street
or intersection.
Speed limit sign. This
is the highest speed
you can travel under
ideal conditions.
No trucks.
The roadway ahead
is for one-way traffic
coming toward you. Do
not drive into it.
No bicycles.
Do not pass. Do not cross yellow lines. You
can’t see far enough ahead to pass safely.
See page 48 for
instructions on how
to apply for a permit,
license or ID card.

-- 20 of 72 --

21
CHAPTER 4
WARNING SIGNS are diamond-shaped, with a yellow background and black letters. They signal conditions immediately ahead, such
as road hazards, changes in direction or other situations. When you see a warning sign, be prepared to use extra caution or to make
changes as you drive.
WARNING SIGNS—
BLACK ON A YELLOW BACKGROUND
Traffic control signal ahead.
Be prepared to stop.
Divided highway ahead with
a center strip (median). Keep
to the right.
Road ahead makes a gentle
curve (to the right). Slow
down, keep right, don’t pass.
Two-lane narrow bridge or
culvert ahead. Approach
with caution.
Merge. Other traffic may be
moving into your lane. Be
ready to change your speed
and lane so other drivers can
merge safely.
SCHOOL
SIGNS
Divided highway ends ahead.
Be careful as you approach
the point where two-way
begins again.
Two-way traffic ahead. Drive
in the right-hand lane and
expect oncoming traffic in
the left-hand lane.
School Zone
Vehicles or loads higher than
the clearance shown can’t go
through the underpass.
Steep hill ahead. All drivers
approach with caution. You
may want to use a lower gear
to slow your vehicle.
Two roadways come together
ahead with a new lane added.
You do not have to merge
(form one line), but watch for
traffic in the new lane.
Deer Crossing 	Pedestrian Crossing. Slow
down and prepare to stop.
Watch both sides of the
street. You must yield.
Stop sign ahead.
Be prepared to stop.
Right lane ends ahead.
Prepare to merge.
There are many other signs similar to these
warning of activities and potential hazards on
or near the roadway. Watch both sides of the
road. Be prepared to slow down and/or stop. 	School Crossing

-- 21 of 72 --

22
CHAPTER 4
WARNING SIGNS—
BLACK ON A YELLOW BACKGROUND
Reflector placed in front of
objects close to the edge of
the road, such as culverts
or center piers on divided
highways.
Reflector placed on the end-
rails on narrow bridges or on
other obstructions to make
them stand out.
Pass to the right
Night-time reflector that
shows where the road lies
(road alignment).
Two-way traffic ahead. Drive
in the right-hand lane and
expect oncoming traffic in
the left-hand lane.
Pass to the right
Reflector placed in front of
an obstruction and at short
changes in road alignment.
Pass to the left
Stripes sloping downward to the right mean bear to the right. Stripes sloping downward to the left mean bear to the left.
The diagonal stripes on a warning sign or barricade show the direction in which the traffic is to pass.
“T” intersection ahead. You
must turn right or left. Be
prepared to yield.
Pass to the left
RAILROAD WARNING SIGNS—
ROUND YELLOW & BLACK SIGN OR BLACK & WHITE CROSSBUCKS
This advance warning sign lets you know you are
approaching railroad tracks. Slow down and be prepared
to stop within 15-50 feet of the first track. If your view is
blocked in either direction, drive very slowly until you
can see down the track. If you see a train coming—STOP!
SCHOOL BUSES, CHURCH BUSES, MOTOR COACHES
and any vehicles hauling explosives or flammable liquids
are required by law to stop. Do not pass a vehicle that
is required to stop at a railroad crossing except when
driving on a multi-lane highway.
RAILROAD CROSSBUCKS. Crossbuck signs are posted at most crossings. Always
slow down, look, listen and be prepared to yield the right-of-way to an oncoming
train.
If there is more than one track, a sign will show the number of tracks at that
crossing.
3
TRACKS

-- 22 of 72 --

23
CHAPTER 4
FLASHING LIGHTS on a crossbuck
mean that a train is coming. Always
stop when the lights are flashing.
Remain stopped until the train has
passed. If there is more than one
track, be sure all tracks are
clear before crossing.
CROSSBUCK WITH FLASHING
LIGHTS AND GATE. Stop when the
lights begin flashing and before the
gate comes down. Remain stopped
until the gates are raised and the
lights stop flashing.
3
TRACKS
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE SIGNS—
ORANGE = WORK ZONE = DANGER
THE COLOR ORANGE tells you
that you are nearing or in a work
zone. Signs, barricades and lane-
channeling devices—such as cones
and barrels—are placed to direct you
through the work zone safely and
protect workers and flag persons.
Most signs are diamond-shaped, but
some are rectangular.
CONSTRUCTION SITES can be
hazardous. You must slow down to
the posted speed. Speeding fines
are doubled in a construction or
maintenance zone when workers
or equipment are present.
Pay attention. Be prepared to:
■ Slow or stop
■ Change lanes
■ Follow instructions
■ React quickly
FLASHING ARROW PANELS guide you into the proper traffic
lane.
ROAD
CONSTRUCTION
1500 FT
ROAD
CONSTRUCTION
NEXT 	5 	MILES
Move left 	Lane closed
See pages 53 through 56 for
important information about
sharing the road with trains.
QUIET ZONES
Quiet Zones are areas where
trains do not blow their horn
during normal operation.
Crossings within a Quiet
Zone may be equipped with
supplemental safety measures, funded by local
governments seeking to decrease noise levels
resulting from the Federal Railroad Administration
(FRA) Train Horn Rule.
The quickest way to recognize an active Quiet Zone
is to identify a ‘No Train Horn’ sign adjacent to the
crossing. Train engineers still reserve the right to
blow the horn when appropriate.
In a Quiet Zone:
▶ Trains will not sound horns during normal
operation
▶ Horn may still be sounded for emergency
situations or for other safety reasons
▶ Crossings within a Quiet Zone may have
supplemental safety features
NO TRAIN HORN

-- 23 of 72 --

24
CHAPTER 4
FLAGPERSONS are used in cases of extreme hazards. They stand in the road and wear orange hats and orange vests, shirts or jackets.
They hold red signs or flags to direct traffic. The law demands that you obey them.
PENALTY FOR FAILING TO OBEY CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
On conviction—misdemeanor punishable by a fine between
$100.00 to $1,000.00 and/or up to 30 days in jail plus liability for
damage to property and injury or death of another person.
Speeding fines are doubled in construction and maintenance
zones when workers or equipment are present.
OR 	OR
STOP 	GO
Channeling Devices
Used to direct traffic flow.
When instructed to stop, stop in your lane. Don’t veer right or left.
■ Do not attempt to move forward until the flag person signals you to go.
■ Proceed with caution. Expect workers and machinery, be prepared to slow or stop.
■ Always be on the lookout for oncoming cars and trucks in your lane.
BARRICADE 	PANEL 	CONE 	DRUM 	BARRICADE
Slow Moving
Vehicle Emblem
This emblem is used
on Slow Moving
Vehicles (SMVs) such as
agricultural equipment,
highway and roadside construction equipment
and highway maintenance equipment traveling on
public highways at speeds of 25 MPH or less.

-- 24 of 72 --

25
CHAPTER 4
GUIDE SIGNS—
GREEN, WHITE OR BROWN
GUIDE SIGNS give you travel information. They identify highways, show distances, mark exits,
point to parks and recreation areas and more.
Business Route Guides Sigs indicates an officially designated highway
that branches off the regularly numbered highway and goes through the
business portion of the city.
MILEPOSTS provide a means of identifying the location of accidents,
breakdowns or other emergencies. Mileposts mark every mile on
interstate highways starting at the state line. Numbering on north-south
highways starts at the southern line and on east-west highways at the
western line.
GREEN INTERSTATE GUIDE SIGNS are usually mounted overhead. The
arrows show the lane or lanes to be used to follow a certain highway.
HHOSPITAL
OKLAHOMA
KEEP
LAND
GRAND!
SERVICE SIGNS—
BLUE
SERVICE SIGNS give information and directions about facilities. They show where
service stations, restaurants and motels are available.
Watch for the litter barrel sign. It’s the only lawful place on the highway where you
can throw trash. Litter barrels are located at all rest and picnic areas and all turnpike
toll stations.

-- 25 of 72 --

26
CHAPTER 4
DID YOU KNOW?
Color-blind people know
the color by the position
of the lights: Red on top—
Yellow in the middle—
Green on the bottom.
Green Light: Go—You can cross the intersection or
turn except where turns are not allowed. Be sure the
intersection is clear before you start and watch out for
drivers who try to race through the intersection to beat
a red light.
Yellow Light: Steady—Warning! The light is about to turn
red! You must stop if you can stop safely before entering the
crosswalk at the intersection. Adjust your speed as you approach
so that you can come to a smooth stop if needed. Don’t speed up
to beat the light. Enter the intersection carefully. Collisions often
happen here.
Red Light: Stop!—Come to a complete stop before entering the
crosswalk or intersection. You must remain stopped until the
light turns green.
After coming to a complete stop, you may turn right on red and
you may turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street
unless there are signs forbidding the turn. When you turn, you
must yield to all pedestrians and vehicles using the intersection,
including bicycles.
Green Arrows: Turn—When the green arrow is lit, you may turn
in the direction of the arrow, even when the red light is still on. If
you are in a turning-only lane, you must wait for the arrow. You
can only make the turn indicated by the arrow unless there are
signs with other information. If there are turning lanes, you must
be in the proper lane to make the turn.
Enter the intersection cautiously.
You must yield to pedestrians in
the crosswalk and to other vehicles
legally in the intersection.
Flashing Yellow Arrow: Left Turn
– Reduce speed and cautiously
proceed with left turn after yielding
to oncoming traffic and pedestrians.
Oncoming traffic has the right-of-
way.
Flashing Red Light: Stop!—Used at dangerous intersections
where the crossing traffic may or may not stop. A flashing red
light means the same as a stop sign: You may go when it’s safe to
cross the intersection.
Flashing Yellow Light: Caution!—Slow down, look in both
directions and drive slowly and carefully through the
intersection. Be prepared to stop.
Watch out for drivers who try to beat the
light and race through the intersection!
TRAFFIC
SIGNALS
TRAFFIC SIGNALS control the movement of vehicles and pedestrians
at intersections. They eliminate the guesswork about who goes next by
granting the right-of-way in each direction. You must obey traffic signals,
except when an officer is directing traffic. Then you must obey the traffic
officer at all times.
Adjust your speed as you approach an intersection so that you can slow
down or stop if the light changes. Even though you may have the green
light, always put safety first and yield the right-of-way if yielding will
prevent a collision, even if the other person is wrong.

-- 26 of 72 --

27
CHAPTER 4
See pages 31 through
32 for more important
information about lane
markings on multi-lane
roadways.
PEDESTRIAN
SIGNALS
“Walk” and “Don’t Walk” signs are used only to direct and protect the safety of people crossing the
intersection on foot or in wheelchairs. Pedestrians should obey these signs, if present, instead of
the traffic signal.
X
X 	X
X 	X
Leave the curb to cross
the street.
“Flashing”—Don’t leave the
curb, but continue if already
in the intersection.
Do not leave the curb.
Red
Don’t use lane.
Yellow broken line:
Two-lane, two-way
traffic, passing permitted.
Yellow
Clear the lane. If flashing,
left turn permitted.
YELLOW SOLID LINE IN YOUR LANE: DO NOT PASS
Green
Lane open for traffic.
Two-lane, two-way
traffic. No passing for
traffic in the right lane
(solid line in that lane).
Two-lane, two-way
traffic. No passing
in either direction.
Cross the center line
only to turn left.
LANE CONTROL
SIGNALS
PAVEMENT
MARKINGS
Pavement markings regulate traffic.
Yellow and white pavement markings show you:
• Which lane you should be using.
• Where visibility is limited and passing is dangerous.
• Where traffic is traveling toward you in the next lane.
• Where you may safely wait for an opportunity to make a left turn.

-- 27 of 72 --

28
CHAPTER 5
“Right-of-way” laws help create a safe, smooth traffic flow. In intersections and other places where
vehicles and pedestrians can’t all cross at the same time, right-of-way laws control who can go
forward and who must yield or wait. These laws also help establish legal fault in a collision or if a
pedestrian is hurt. The right-of-way laws apply to all people and all vehicles, including bicyclists.
Always put safety first. When other people don’t follow the rules of right-of-way, you should
yield—even if the right-of-way belongs to you—when there is a possibility of damage or injury.
Right-of-way should be determined by each driver before entering an intersection. If you have the
right-of-way and another driver yields it to you, proceed immediately.
Make sure the other driver sees you. Make eye contact.
YIELD
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Drive cautiously and
defensively. Drive friendly.
Think of the right-of-way
as something to be given,
not taken.
Right-of-Way ̶ 	When to Yield
See page 49 for
important information
on sharing the road with
pedestrians.
YOU MUST YIELD TO CHILDREN PLAYING IN THE STREETS
In crowded downtown areas and in suburban neighborhoods, children play in the streets
because there may not be parks or playgrounds nearby. Even though they have been told not to
run into the street, children won’t always put safety ahead of a runaway puppy or a bouncing ball.
Children on bicycles can easily forget to slow down before entering an intersection or to signal
and look behind before they turn.
You are responsible for driving with extreme caution when children are present. Slow down
near schools and playgrounds and in residential areas. The cost of hitting a child is very high—in
dollars, grief and guilt.
YOU MUST YIELD TO BLIND PERSONS
Drivers must give the right-of-way to any blind person crossing the street. Blind pedestrians will
normally have a guide dog or will be using a cane. The cane may be all white, white with a red tip
or chrome. The person will tap it on the pavement ahead. The law says you should:
▶ 	Stop immediately and let the person pass.
▶ 	Stop outside the crosswalk, not in the crosswalk.
▶ 	A vehicle must stop 15 feet from a blind person in the roadway or at an intersection.
YOU MUST YIELD TO A FUNERAL PROCESSION
Motorists must yield the right-of-way to a funeral procession. When the funeral lead vehicle
enters an intersection, the remaining vehicles in the procession may follow through the
intersection regardless of any traffic control devices. All vehicles in the procession should have
their headlights on as a signal to other drivers not to drive between or interfere with the funeral
procession."

-- 28 of 72 --

29
CHAPTER 5
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Most drivers are polite,
cooperative and safety
conscious. The few who
drive with an aggressive,
selfish attitude
can make driving
dangerous for the rest
of us. Many collisions
at intersections could
have been avoided if
one of the drivers had
been more cautious and
willing to yield the right-
of-way.
YOU MUST ALWAYS YIELD:
▶ 	When entering or crossing highways
without traffic signs or signals—Stop and
yield to approaching traffic and go only when
it’s safe to do so.
▶ 	When you have a stop sign—Stop before the
crosswalk. Yield to pedestrians and to vehicles
in or approaching the intersection. Cross or
turn when it’s safe to do so.
▶ 	At intersections with yield signs—Slow down
to a reasonable speed and be ready to stop if
other vehicles or pedestrians are approaching
the intersection. Cross or enter the flow of
traffic when it’s safe to do so.
▶ 	To pedestrians—Yield to people crossing the roadway, whether the crosswalk is marked or
unmarked. Be especially alert in school zones and high-traffic pedestrian areas.
▶ 	When making a left turn—Yield to all oncoming traffic. Slow down and stop if you have
to. Go only when there is enough clear distance for you to turn without interfering with
oncoming traffic.
▶ 	When entering or crossing a public road from a private road, alley, driveway or building—
stop before the sidewalk or crosswalk, then go when it’s safe to do so.
▶ 	To emergency vehicles—Yield to police cars, fire engines and
ambulances when they are sounding a siren and/or flashing warning
lights. Pull over to the right edge of the roadway, clear of intersections
and stop until the emergency vehicle has passed. In heavy traffic, when
you can’t pull over, clear a path for the vehicle.
▶ 	If an officer signals you to stop while you’re driving in the left lane, you
must still pull over to the right shoulder, even if that means crossing
several lanes of traffic. (See “Changing Lanes,” page 32, to learn how to
change lanes safely.)
▶ 	You don’t have to yield for emergency vehicles without warning lights or
sirens.
▶ 	You must move to the left lane or slow down for any vehicle on the side
of the highway. This includes emergency vehicles, law enforcement,
maintenance workers or cars with their hazard lights flashing.
Stop at crosswalk
and yield to cars
approaching
YIELD THE
RIGHTOFWAY
AT A STOP SIGN
Slow before
starting turn
Not while turning
Slow
before
entering
crossing
Not while
crossing
VIEW
BLOCKED
Pull over and STOP for
emergency vehicles
Don’t STOP in intersections
RIGHT-OF-WAY
AT INTERSECTIONS
At four-way-stop intersections and at
intersections without stop signs or signals,
the car or truck that entered the intersection
first has the right-of-way. When two vehicles
approach at the same time, the driver on
the left yields to the driver on the right, as
shown.

-- 29 of 72 --

30
CHAPTER 5
BOTH CARS MUST STOP
It is mandatory revocation of driver license for one year for
failing to stop for a school bus with red loading/ unloading
lights flashing.
Notes
YIELD
This car yields
to car on right
CROSSING AN INTERSECTION
More collisions and injuries occur at intersections than at any other place. Always slow
down, look both ways and look left again before you enter an intersection. Slow down
before you enter, then increase your speed until you’ve cleared the intersection. DO
NOT slow down while you’re turning or crossing!
If your view is blocked so that you can’t see traffic on the side street, slow down so that
you can stop if a car is coming.
If traffic is stopped and is blocking an intersection, stop before reaching the crosswalk
and wait for the traffic to move.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO A SCHOOL OR
CHURCH BUS
Drive carefully and be ready to slow down and stop when
you are near a school bus. If you approach a bus with flashing
red lights and/or showing a red “STOP” sign, it means that
children are getting on or off the bus and you must stop.
You must stop and remain stopped until—
▶ 	the bus has started moving, OR
▶ 	the driver motions for you to proceed, OR
▶ 	the red flashing lights go off and/or the sign is pulled
back.
You DON’T have to stop for a school bus when—
▶ 	the bus is on a different roadway, OR
▶ 	the bus is stopped in a loading zone by a controlled-
access highway where pedestrians are not allowed to
cross.
MOVE OVER LAW
OR BERNARDO'S LAW
(47 O.S. § 11-314)
The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a
stationary authorized emergency vehicle, a Department of
Transportation maintenance vehicle, a Turnpike Authority
maintenance vehicle, a stationary vehicle that is displaying
flashing lights or a licensed wrecker that is displaying a
flashing amber light, a combination red or blue light or any
combination of amber, red or blue lights, shall:
1. 	If traveling on a highway that consists of two or more
lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel
as that of the driver, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and shall, if possible and with due regard to the
road, weather and traffic conditions, change lanes into
a lane that is not adjacent to the stationary authorized
emergency vehicle.

-- 30 of 72 --

31
CHAPTER 6
WHITE SOLID
WHITE DASHED
YELLOW SOLID
YELLOW SOLID
	WHITE SOLID
WHITE DASHED
WHITE SOLID
WHITE SOLID
A lane is part of a roadway wide enough for a car or a single line of vehicles to travel safely. Most
lanes on hard-surfaced roads are marked with white or yellow lines. On dirt or gravel roads, some
rural roads, private drives and other roadways, the lanes may not be marked, but they are there
anyway. You are expected to always drive in the proper lane, whether the lane is marked or not.
Yellow Dashes—Traffic moves in opposite directions
on each side of the line. Passing is permitted when
it’s safe.
White Dashes—Traffic moves in the same direction
on each side of the white dashes. Passing is
permitted when it’s safe.
Solid Yellow Lines—Traffic moves in opposite
directions on each side of the line. Solid yellow lines
tell you two things:
(1) if a solid yellow line is on the left, you are on the
proper side of the road and (2) if you cross that line,
there’s a danger from approaching vehicles or from
obstacles in the median. Single or double solid
yellow lines mean DO NOT PASS. You may cross the
line to turn left.
Solid White Line—Traffic moves in the same
direction on each side of the line, but passing
is hazardous, as when you’re approaching an
intersection or merge area.
2 Lanes—Two-lane highways have a single
broken yellow centerline. You should always
drive to the right of the centerline, except to
pass when you can pass safely.
3 Lanes—Three-lane highways have
two lanes for traffic flowing in opposite
directions. Drivers from either direction may
use the center lane for left turns. Enter this
center lane only to make a left turn. You
must not pass in this lane.
Center lane Marking: One solid yellow line
on each side and yellow dash lines on the inside of the solid yellow lines. This lane is not to be
used for passing.
4 Lanes—A four-lane highway is divided in half by two solid yellow lines in the center. The two
lanes on each side are divided by a dashed white line.
Lane Usage and Maneuvers
PASSING
	ONLY
NORMAL
	DRIVING
2 LANES
FOR
	LEFT
	TURN
NORMAL
	DRIVING
NORMAL
	DRIVING
3 LANES
FOR
	PASSING
	AND
	LEFT
	TURNS
NORMAL
	DRIVING
4 LANES
DRIVE IN
PROPER LANE

-- 31 of 72 --

32
CHAPTER 6
CHANGING LANES
Never change lanes until you are sure it’s safe.
▶ 	Watch for clearance ahead and behind.
▶ 	Check your rearview mirrors.
▶ 	Signal your intention to change lanes.
▶ 	Look over your shoulder in the direction you will be moving.
▶ 	Look behind you to both sides again.
▶ 	Check your blind spots.
▶ 	Stay clear of the blind spots of the vehicle ahead of you.
When a driver ahead of you signals a lane change, slow down and leave space for the change.
EXPRESSWAY DRIVING
Oklahoma has many miles of limited-
access highways designed for safe,
uninterrupted travel at higher
speeds. There are no stop signs,
traffic signals or railroad crossings.
Freeways, toll roads, throughways,
turnpikes and expressways usually
have no steep hills or sharp curves
that limit your view of the road
ahead. “Limited access” means
that you enter or leave the roadway
only at entrances and exits, called
interchanges, without ever crossing
the path of other traffic. Many
interchanges have places to get food,
gas and lodging.
Driving on controlled-access highways is different—and much safer—than driving on non-
controlled-access highways. The rules for driving on these roads are different, too.
Speed
▶ 	If your car is not in good condition or if you can’t or don’t want to drive at or above the
minimum speed limit, don’t use the expressway.
▶ 	Drive between the minimum (usually 40 mph) and maximum (55-75 mph) speed limits.
Driving too slowly is against the law because it’s dangerous. Always drive at a safe speed for
the conditions, such as traffic flow, rain, snow, etc.
▶ 	Maintain a constant speed. Don’t speed up or slow down without good reason.
▶ 	Adjust your speed and lane to allow others to enter the freeway safely.
▶ 	Move to the right to allow vehicles driving faster than you to pass.
Use the Proper Lane
▶ 	Use the right-hand lane when you’re driving slower than the other traffic.
▶ 	Use the middle or left-hand lane if you are traveling faster than the other traffic.
▶ 	Stay in the middle of your lane. You can change lanes when necessary but don’t weave in and
out of traffic. Changing lanes back and forth doesn’t get you there faster.
▶ 	Do not travel alongside other vehicles at the same speed. Avoid cars moving in packs. Stay
out of other drivers’ blind spots. Change speed and/or lanes so that you don’t block the
normal flow of traffic.
BLIND SPOT 	BLIND SPOT
OKLAHOMA
35
MAXIMUM
75
MINIMUM
40

-- 32 of 72 --

33
CHAPTER 6
Avoid Collisions—Drive with Caution
▶ 	As far as possible, plan your entrance, direction and exit.
▶ 	Stay 3 seconds behind the vehicle in front of you. Allow 4 seconds in bad weather.
▶ 	Watch 15-20 seconds ahead for cars braking, entering and exiting.
▶ 	Observe all highway signs. If you are going to exit, move to the exit lane as early as
possible.
▶ 	Never turn around on the expressway. Do not, under any conditions, cross the median or
divider to turn your car around on a controlled-access highway. Keep driving to the next
exit, get off and re-enter the highway in the other direction.
Stopping
▶ 	If you have a breakdown, an emergency or must stop for some reason, signal, then pull
off to the extreme right shoulder away from moving traffic where it’s safe. Turn on your
emergency flashers.
▶ 	When you are out of your car, never walk near the roadway. Keep children away from the
traffic.
Entering the Expressway (See below)
▶ 	You must yield to vehicles already on the expressway.
▶ 	Enter in the acceleration lane and stay to the right. Adjust your speed and watch the traffic.
▶ 	Signal left and when it’s safe, merge into the proper lane.
Leaving the Expressway (See below)
▶ 	Move to the proper lane well in advance of the exit, especially in heavy traffic.
▶ 	Maintain your speed at the flow of traffic until you reach the exit.
▶ 	Signal right at least 100 feet before the exit.
▶ 	Slow down in the deceleration lane or exit ramp and keep slowing down until you reach the
posted speed limit. Check your speedometer.
Move carefully into the right
lane only when there is a break
in traffic sufficient to allow
entrance without interfering
with normal flow.
Do not slow
down here.
Slow down after
turning into
deceleration lane.
Don’t make
last minute
turnoff.
Check the
posted safe speed
for the ramp.
Adjust to traffic speed
in acceleration lane and
signal left turn.
Do not enter here at
sharp angle.
TRAFFIC FLOW
MEDIAN
ACCELERATION LANE
DECELERATION LANE
WRONG
TRAFFIC FLOW
RAMP
MERGING AREA
EXIT 1 MILE
Norman
9
Norman
9
ENTERING AND LEAVING AN EXPRESSWAY

-- 33 of 72 --

34
CHAPTER 6
PASSING
On a roadway that is divided into four or more lanes, a vehicle cannot impede the normal flow
of traffic by driving in the left lane. However, you are not prohibited from driving in a lane other
than the right-hand lane in certain conditions like traffic conditions or flow or road configuration,
such as the potential of merging traffic, require the use of other lanes to maintain safe traffic
conditions. You may not exceed the speed limit to pass another vehicle.
Passing on the left
1. 	Do not move to the left until you are sure you can do it safely. Check ahead for at least 200
feet of clear roadway without a “No Passing Zone.”
2. As you get ready to pass, especially in a large truck or bus, never get so close that the vehicle
blocks your view of the road ahead. Follow at a safe distance until you can see far enough
ahead to pass safely.
3. Be sure that no other car is passing or is about to pass your car at the same time. Check your
rearview mirror and look over your shoulder to check your blind spots.
4. Signal for a left turn and when clear, move into the left lane.
5. Pass the car ahead and don’t return to the right lane until you can see that car in the
rearview mirror.
6. Signal and pull into the right lane. Turn off your signal when you’re in the lane.
Passing on the right
You may overtake and pass on the right when:
▶ 	The road is wide enough for two or more lanes in each direction and there are no parked cars
or other obstructions on the roadway.
▶ 	You are on a one-way road.
▶ 	The vehicle in front of you is making or about to make a left turn. You can never legally pass
on the right by driving off the pavement or main portion of the highway.
No Passing Zones
▶ 	You MUST NOT PASS:
▶ 	When the solid yellow line is in your lane, whether there are two yellow lines or a single solid
line and a dashed line.
▶ 	On hills or curves, even if the road is not marked.
DO NOT PASS within 100 feet of an obstructed view or if vehicles or pedestrians might cross
your path. Watch for bridges, viaducts, tunnels, overpasses, railroad crossings, intersections and
crosswalks.
When someone is passing you:
1. 	Keep everyone safe—help the other
driver pass you.
2. Stay in your lane and move right if
being passed on the left.
3. Don’t increase your speed. If a car
approaches from the other direction
while you’re being passed, slow down
and let the passing driver pull in front
of you.
Getting there late
is better than not
getting there at all.
PASSING
NO PASSING
WHEN YELLOW LINE
IS IN YOUR LANE
CENTER
LINE
NO
PASSING
LINE

-- 34 of 72 --

35
CHAPTER 6
TURNING
In 2008, there were 4,813 collisions caused by
drivers who made improper or illegal turns.
To beginning drivers, turning seems simple,
but it’s more difficult than you think because
it requires (1) paying attention in all directions
at once, (2) planning and preparation and (3)
good timing.
Turn Signals—Your turn signals are used to
inform and warn other drivers that you intend
to turn left or right, change lanes, slow down,
pull off or onto the roadway or stop. Your signal
helps protect you and enables other drivers to
adjust to your moves.
It is illegal to turn without signaling. You
should signal for at least 100 feet or 1/3 of a
block before you turn, slow down or stop.
You can use the turn indicators on your car or
you can use arm signals. When you use arm
signals, bring your arm in during the actual
turn to keep control of the steering wheel.
Making a Turn —There are six steps in making
a good turn. Study the diagrams on how to
make right and left turns. See page 36. Learn
the six steps and the diagrams. They will help
you avoid costly collisions and injuries.
Making a Left Turn—Turn when the oncoming
traffic is clear and watch behind you for cars
trying to pass you while you’re turning.
ARM SIGNALS
LEFT TURN
Arm and hand
extended straight out
RIGHT TURN
Arm and hand
pointed upward
Extend you arm well out of the window and make your signal clear.
SLOW OR STOP
Arm and hand pointed
down with palm to the rear
Do:
1. 	Signal what you intend to do.
2. Look behind and on both sides to see where other vehicles are, so you can change lanes
and make the turn safely.
3. Move into the correct lane as soon as possible. The faster the traffic is moving, the sooner
you should move into the proper lane.
4. If you are going too fast to make the turn safely, slow down before you reach the stop
line or crosswalk. Select the proper gear before entering the intersection and accelerate
slightly through the turn. Don’t brake or depress the clutch while turning. Don’t shift
gears in the intersection.
5. Make the turn correctly. It will be easy if you are in the proper lane and driving slowly
enough when you start the turn.
6. Finish the turn in the proper lane.
Don’t:
■ 	Don’t turn unless the turn is permitted and can be made easily.
■ 	Don’t try to turn from the wrong lane. If you aren’t in the proper lane, drive to the next
intersection and make the turn from the proper lane there. Circle back if you must.
■ 	Left turns—Don’t turn the steering wheel to the left while waiting for oncoming traffic
to pass. If you are hit from the rear while your wheels are turned, the impact can push
you right into oncoming cars. Wait until you are sure you can complete the turn before
turning the wheels.

-- 35 of 72 --

36
CHAPTER 6
HOW TO MAKE A LEFT TURN
There are five steps in making a left turn.
Take care to keep close to the centerline, but
don't cross it.
HOW TO MAKE A RIGHT TURN
There are four steps in making a right turn.
Be care ful not to swing to the left before or
during the turn.
4
Keep as close as
possible to right.
3
Select proper gear
and look both ways
before starting to
make a right turn.
2
Begin turn signal
and start slowing
down at least 100
feet from corner.
1
Far before the
corner, move over
to the right side.
D
O
N
O
T
T
U
R
N
W
I
D
E
L
I
K
E
T
H
I
S
5
After completing
turn, gradually move
over to right.
4
Enter street just to
right of center.
3
Select proper gear
and look both ways
before starting to
make turn.
2
Begin turn signal
and start slowing
down at least 100
feet from corner.
1
Well ahead of the
turn, look for any
following cars and
move over close to
centerline. Signal for
moving over.
DO NOT E
N
T
E
R
IN
T
E
R
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
I
N
RIGHT HAND LANE
D
O
N
O
T
C
U
T
C
O
R
N
E
R
WHEN TO TURN LEFT OF
CENTER: LEFT TURNS-TWO
VEHICLES
When you are meeting
another driver at an
intersection and both of you
want to turn left, each will turn
to the left of the other. Leave
from the left lane and enter in
the left lane.

-- 36 of 72 --

37
CHAPTER 6
TURNING ON ONE-WAY STREETS
When you are turning on one-way or divided streets, always turn from the lane nearest the curb.
When driving straight, you may drive in any lane, but the extreme right or left lanes should be
used for turning. Don’t weave in and out of lanes.
NO TURNS FROM
THESE LANES
EAST	WEST
NORTH
SOUTH
TURNING ON INTERSECTING ONE-WAY STREET
In this diagram, westbound vehicles in the left lane may turn left. Southbound vehicles in the
right lane may turn right. Other vehicles continue straight ahead.

-- 37 of 72 --

38
CHAPTER 6
BACKING
Backing is more difficult for the beginner than driving forward because the field of vision is
blocked by the car itself and it’s harder to control speed and direction. You will need a lot of
practice to keep absolute control of the car or truck. Backing out of a parking place requires you
to look in both directions and double-check for cars and pedestrians.
▶ 	Place your foot on the brake and shift to reverse. Grasp the steering wheel at the 12 o’clock
position with your left hand. Place your right arm on the back of the seat and look directly
through the rear window. Never use your rearview mirror for backing up.
▶ 	Accelerate gently and smoothly,
keeping your speed slow. Your vehicle
is much harder to steer while you
are backing up. Steer slightly in the
direction the rear of the vehicle should
move. Back slowly into the lane closest
to you for the direction you will be
going. If backing up while turning,
make quick checks to the front and
sides. Continue looking to the rear
until coming to a complete stop.
▶ 	Never back into an intersection to turn
around. It’s much safer to drive around
the block.
SAFETY TIP
Always check behind
your car for bikes,
tricycles and even small
children BEFORE you
get into your car. This is
especially important for
vans and pickups
Notes

-- 38 of 72 --

39	39
CHAPTER 7
The Basic Speed Rule
Consider all the conditions that affect your driving, drive at a speed that is safe for those
conditions and be able to stop without hitting anyone.
The Basic Speed Rule does not set an exact speed limit but means that the speed you may drive
is limited by the current conditions. For example, the posted speed limit is 65 mph, but if you’re
driving at night on a two-lane state highway, it’s raining or it’s very foggy, 65 mph is too fast for
those conditions.
THE BASIC SPEED RULE
■ 	Your speed must be careful and prudent (using skill and good judgment).
■ 	Your speed must be reasonable and proper, not too fast and not too slow, for the conditions:
▶ 	Amount of traffic—how many cars on the road
▶ 	Speed of traffic—how fast or slow it’s moving
▶ 	Whether pedestrians are present—especially children in school zones
▶ 	Surface of the road—rough or smooth, paved, gravel, etc.
▶ 	Width of the road—one-lane, two-lane, four-lane
▶ 	Structure of the road—straight, curving, bridges, narrow shoulders, etc.
▶ 	Visibility—how far ahead you can see clearly
▶ 	Weather and air conditions—rain, snow, ice, fog, smoke, dust, etc.
▶ 	Your own driving ability
■ 	You must not drive so slowly that you block, hinder or interfere with other vehicles moving at
normal speeds.
■ 	Your speed must be adjusted to conditions so you can stop within a clear distance ahead.
Suppose you are driving in a line of downtown traffic and the car ahead of you stops suddenly.
If you can’t stop in time to avoid hitting that car from behind, you are either breaking the “Basic
Speed Rule”—even if you were driving within the posted speed limit—or following too closely.
THE LAW SAYS
No motor vehicle shall
be driven at a speed
greater than is careful
and prudent and not
greater than or less than
is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the
traffic, surface and width
of the highway and of
any other conditions then
existing. No person shall
drive any vehicle upon
a highway at a speed
greater than will permit
him to stop within the
assured clear distance
ahead.
MAXIMUM PENALTY
FOR VIOLATING THE
BASIC SPEED RULE
Upon conviction of speeding,
you may be fined up to $654.00
and sentenced to 30 days in jail.
Fines double in school and con-
struction zones when workers or
equipment are present.
CONSIDER ALL THE CONDITIONS
THAT AFFECT YOUR DRIVING
RAIN POSES A GRAVE RISK TO TRACTION LOSS

-- 39 of 72 --

40	40
CHAPTER 7
SPEED LIMITS
Under state law—unless otherwise posted—and under normal conditions, you may drive at the
speeds listed in the chart below:
STATE SPEED LIMITS
UNLESS OTHERWISE POSTED
Controlled access highways 	75 mph
Turnpikes 	80 mph
County roads 	55 mph
Highways within state parks or wildlife refuges 	35 mph
School zones on any highway outside of a municipality in a properly marked zone 	25 mph
VERY IMPORTANT: CAREFULLY OBSERVE AND OBEY ALL POSTED SPEED LIMITS
Under state law, cities and towns can set their own speed limits. These limits will change
according to the zones. Watch carefully and obey speed limit signs in business, residential and
school zones.
NIGHT
DAY
NIGHT DRIVING
Night driving presents a serious danger, especially on
poorly lit highways and country roads. The distance
that you can see clearly is greatly reduced. Dark-
colored animals, dark objects on the road or people
walking or riding bikes dressed in dark clothing will
be hard to see.
You should reduce your speed at night and adjust
to the road and weather conditions. Don’t overdrive
your lights—adjust your speed so you can stop within
the distance you can see. You should consider how
powerful your lights are and how responsive your
brakes are. As soon as you see pedestrians, animals or
objects on the road in front of you, you must be able
to stop before you hit them. If you are overdriving
your lights, you will not be able to stop in time.
Don’t wear sunglasses or colored glasses when
driving at night or on dark days. Glare from
oncoming headlights, billboard and advertising
lights and in some conditions, from street lights can
interfere with your night driving vision because your
eyes take longer to adjust. Colored lenses cause your
eyes to adjust even more slowly and can reduce your
vision.
Notes
ROAD RAGE
It is important to recognize
the warning signs of
aggressive driving to avoid
becoming involved in a
hazardous situation. Examples
of road rage include tailgating,
cutting off other vehicles,
careless lane changes,
speeding and running red
lights. Escalated road rage
could include obscene
gestures, verbal assault,
intentionally hitting another
vehicle and threatening to use
a weapon.
Here is a list of precautions
you can take behind the
wheel:
▶ Avoid offending other
drivers
▶ Do not engage other
drivers
▶ Keep your anger in check
If you suspect another driver
is targeting you, go to a safe
place such as a police, fire or
gas station, where there are
people. If necessary, call 911
immediately. DO NOT drive
home.

-- 40 of 72 --

41
CHAPTER 8
Stopping and Following
STOPPING DISTANCES
There is no sure way to tell exactly how long it will take you to stop at a certain speed. Your
stopping distance depends on:
▶ 	Your own reaction time.
▶ 	Weather and road conditions.
▶ 	The weight of your vehicle.
▶ 	The condition of your brakes.
There are three steps in stopping your vehicle—perception, reaction and braking.
PERCEPTION, REACTION AND BRAKING TIME
Step 	Time 	Explanation
Perception 	About .5 seconds 	See/hear danger
Reaction 	About .66 seconds 	Brain tells foot to brake
Braking/stopping 	Depends on speed 	Press brake until car stops
Suppose you’re driving on the turnpike at night at 80 mph. A deer suddenly appears in your
headlights. Will you be able to stop in time?
SAFETY TIP
Watch when the rear of the
vehicle ahead passes a sign, pole
or any other fixed point, count the
seconds it takes you to reach the
same point (one-one-thousand,
two-one-thousand, three-one-
thousand, four-one thousand). You
are too close if you pass the point
before counting four seconds.
Always increase your distance on
slick roads, following large vehicles,
motorcycles, night, fog or bad
weather.
20 	44 	15 - 22 	59 - 66
66 	33 - 50 	99 - 116
88 	53 - 107 	141 - 195
110 	83 - 167 	193 - 277
132 	120 - 240 	252 - 372
154 	163 - 327 	317 - 481
176 	213 - 427 	389 - 603
30
40
50
60
70
80
Driver Reaction Distance Feet 	Braking Distance Feet 	Total Stopping Distance Feet
ESTIMATED EMERGENCY STOPPING DISTANCE
S D: From eye to brain to foot to wheel to road

-- 41 of 72 --

42
CHAPTER 8
BRAKING
You should apply your brakes slowly and evenly. With a standard transmission, you can use your
gearshift to slow down when you’re approaching a stop sign or signal. First, flash your brake lights
to signal the car behind you, then shift down to a lower gear.
Braking Under Emergency Conditions
NOTE: These instructions are for standard braking systems.
▶ 	Flat tire or blowout—Take your foot off the gas pedal and apply your brakes cautiously.
NEVER brake suddenly.
▶ 	If you run off the pavement—Hold the steering wheel firmly. Apply your brakes lightly
and reduce your speed until you can safely return to the pavement. Check traffic in both
directions and when it’s safe, steer carefully back into your lane.
▶ 	On ice, snow, sleet, gravel, sand and other loose surfaces—Tap the brakes slightly, about
one second apart. Braking suddenly can make the car skid. (CAUTION: Never tap antilock
brakes.)
Sudden over-correction can make you lose control of your car.
Make changes slowly and carefully.
STOPPING IN ICY AND
RAINY CONDITIONS
Always drive cautiously when
roads or weather conditions can
make you lose control of your
car. Slow down and be ready for
an emergency situation—for the
drivers ahead as well as for yourself.
Skidding—Icy roads are dangerous.
You must be extremely careful on
ice, especially on “black ice,” a clear
icy coating on the road surface that
you can’t see. There is very little
you can do once a skid starts. The
best skid control is prevention. Get
the feel of the roadway—test your
brakes gently after the car is in motion to find out how much traction you have. Traction will vary,
changing with traffic use and sunshine or shade.
On roads or spots that seem clear, always be alert for black ice and watch for danger spots ahead,
such as on bridges or in shady areas.
Sudden braking increases the skid. Don’t use the clutch.
As a general rule, if the car starts to skid, take your foot off the brake and turn the steering wheel
in the direction of the skid if you can do so without running off the road, hitting something or
steering into oncoming traffic.
Steering into the direction of the skid may not always be the best action. For example, if you
are meeting other traffic and the rear of your car skids to the left, you wouldn’t steer into the
oncoming traffic.
BRAKING
UNDER
EMERGENCY
CONDITIONS
STANDARD
BRAKES
Maximum braking comes
just before the wheels
lock and stop rotating.
Too much pressure on the
brake pedal will lock the
wheels and the vehicle
will skid.
ANTILOCK
BRAKE SYSTEMS
(ABS)
Braking techniques
for stopping safely
and avoiding skids are
different from those for
standard brakes. If your
car is equipped with an
ABS, read the owner’s
manual for instructions on
maximum braking.
The best advice
for driving on icy
roads is DON’T.
Ask yourself: Is
this trip worth
the risk?

-- 42 of 72 --

43
CHAPTER 8
Rain—The roads are likely to be very slick just after it begins to rain or drizzle. The first few drops
loosen built-up grease and dirt on the road surface, covering it with a slippery film that makes
driving very dangerous. Keep alert—the first few drops of rain signal danger. Slow down and use
extra caution: “Slippery when wet.”
Hydroplaning—As long as the road surface is wet, you should slow down to avoid hydroplaning.
Hydroplaning means that your tires lose contact with the road surface and ride on the film
of water. Hydroplaning reduces traction and increases stopping distance. Turning is more
hazardous. Wide tires can hydroplane even at reduced speeds.
▶ 	Slow down or pull off the road in a heavy downpour.
▶ 	Never drive into water crossing the roadway. You can’t judge the depth of the water or force
and pull of the flow.
FOLLOWING
You should always give yourself a “cushion of safety,” having
open space in front, behind and on the sides. Avoid following too
closely. Stay far enough behind the next vehicle that, if it should
stop suddenly, you can stop safely. Remember that speed, traffic,
road and weather conditions will affect your ability to stop.
▶ 	Allow one car length for every 10 miles per hour of speed OR
▶ 	Use the “three-second rule”—Select a fixed object, such as
a tree, roadside sign or utility pole, ahead of the car in front
of you. Once the car has passed the object, you should be
able to count, “One thousand one, one thousand two, one
thousand three,” before you pass the fixed object. In bad
weather or poor road conditions, increase your count to four
seconds (one thousand four).
Sometimes cars will bunch up and travel in a pack. It’s much
safer to avoid the pack when you can and maintain your cushion
of safety.
If you are traveling in a caravan or motorcade (such as a funeral
procession) outside of a business or residential area, leave at least
200 feet between each vehicle so other cars or trucks can enter
the line safely.
Following a truck—Trucks take longer to stop than cars because
of their size. But at higher speeds or on wet pavement, they may
have better traction and be able to stop more quickly than a car.
If you are following too closely, you may not be able to stop in
time to avoid rear-ending the truck. See Chapter 11 on sharing the
road with trucks.
Slow down and use
extra caution:
“Slippery when wet.”
Allow at
least one
car length
for every
10 mph of
speed or
apply the
three-
second
rule.

-- 43 of 72 --

44
CHAPTER 8
HOW TO AVOID REAR-END COLLISIONS
Rear-end collisions are a major driving problem. They can be avoided if you will follow a
few simple rules.
▶ 	Pay strict attention to your driving when following another car.
▶ 	Watch for brake lights on the four or five cars down the line. It will increase your
response time. Shift your foot to the brake pedal as soon as you see brake lights go
on ahead, so you can stop if needed.
▶ 	Watch for shrinking distance between your car and the one ahead. It’s a sure sign of
danger.
▶ 	Watch for stopped vehicles on the shoulder ahead. It’s sometimes hard to tell
whether a car in the distance ahead is moving or stopped. Compare the car in
question to a fixed object.
▶ 	Look for problems that might develop for the driver ahead of you so you have more
time to react.
▶ 	Above all, leave plenty of space between your car and the car ahead of you as a
safety cushion.
▶ 	If the car ahead of you signals for a left turn, slow down and prepare to stop.
Avoid being hit from behind.
If someone is following you too closely (tailgating):
▶ 	Flash your brake lights if braking will not cause a collision.
▶ 	Slow down and encourage the driver behind you to pass.
▶ 	If these tactics fail, pull over, stop and let the tailgater pass. Keep your doors locked. It’s best
to stop in an area where there are other people, such as a convenience store. If it’s night, pull
into a well-lighted area.
Notes

-- 44 of 72 --

45
CHAPTER 9
Parking
PARKING
Knowing how to park is an important driving skill. Not all collisions are
driving errors. An improperly parked car can roll, gain speed, destroy
property or kill someone. When you leave your car, truck or van:
▶ 	Set the parking brake.
▶ 	Put the gear in low, reverse or “park.”
▶ 	Turn off the motor.
▶ 	Lock the ignition and remove the key.
It’s always a good practice to lock your car, even in your own driveway.
PARKING ON A HIGHWAY
Where parking is permitted, signal, slow down and drive completely off the pavement or the main
traveled part of the roadway.
If your vehicle breaks down, move it completely off the highway. Turn on the emergency flashers.
Watch out for fast traffic going by as you get out of the car. Do not allow children to leave the car
and approach oncoming traffic.
ANGLE PARKING
Angle parking is used in parking lots, shopping centers and sometimes at curbs.
When you enter an angle parking space:
▶ 	Watch for vehicles and pedestrians both ahead and behind.
▶ 	Signal and begin slowing down.
▶ 	Make sure the rear of your car will clear the parked car.
▶ 	Steer sharply into the parking space and then straighten the wheels, centering your car.
▶ 	See graphic to the right.
When you back out of an angle parking space:
▶ 	Make sure nothing is in your way. In a supermarket lot, check for carts.
▶ 	Look both ways and double-check because it’s hard to see oncoming traffic. Be especially
careful if a truck or van is parked beside you, blocking your view.
▶ 	Move back slowly. Be sure traffic is clear in the lane where you’re backing.
▶ 	Tap the horn to warn pedestrians nearby.
▶ 	When you can see past the tops of the cars parked next to you, stop and look again. Look
back and to each side for pedestrians and other drivers.

-- 45 of 72 --

46
CHAPTER 9
Choose a space large enough for your car.
Signal, then drive up even with the car in front
and about 2 feet out from it.
When your front wheels are opposite the rear
bumper of the car in front, quickly turn your
steering wheel all the way to the left. Back
slowly into position alongside the curb, within
18 inches of it.
Make sure you will not interfere with oncoming
traffic, then turn your front wheels all the way
to the right and back slowly toward the curb.
Straighten your front wheels and drive into the
final parking position. Center your car in the
space.
▶ 	Remember that the front of your car will swing opposite to the direction of your turn and can
hit the car next to you.
▶ 	Back slowly while turning until your left front wheel passes the rear bumper of the car
parked on the left.
▶ 	Straighten the wheels as your car comes back into the lane of traffic.
PARALLEL PARKING
Unless there are signs that prohibit parking or a yellow-painted curb, you may park parallel to any
curb and within 18 inches of the curb. Parallel parking takes practice and requires a lot of caution
and control.
Spacing and timing are important. If you are too close to the car ahead or if you cut your wheels
to the right too soon, you’ll drive too close to the rear bumper of the car ahead of you. If you are
too far out from the car in front, you won’t be able to get close enough to the curb. If you cut your
wheels to the left too late, you’ll hit the curb. Each time you drive out or back up, signal, watch for
oncoming traffic and move slowly.
PARKING AND STARTING ON A HILL
A car parked on an incline can roll downhill, forward or backward if the parking brake is not set or
not working properly or if the car isn’t braced against the curb.
To Park on a Hill
▶ 	Parallel park as in the previous section, but stop within six inches of the curb.
▶ 	Brace the wheels against the curb, as described in graphic on the next page.
▶ 	Set the parking brake.
▶ 	Put the car in the proper gear, reverse, low gear or “park.”
▶ 	Turn off the switch.

-- 46 of 72 --

47
CHAPTER 9
Facing downhill—To brace your car when parking downhill, turn your wheels toward the curb
and drive forward slowly until the wheel is against the curb (see diagram). Shift into reverse or
“park.” If the car should roll, the curb will stop it.
Facing uphill, against a curb—Turn your wheels sharply, away from the curb and back up slowly
until the rear of the tire is against the curb. Shift into low gear or “park.” If the car should roll, the
curb will stop it.
Facing uphill, without a curb—Turn your wheels sharply to the right. Shift as above. If the car
should roll, it will roll away from the traffic flow.
To Start on a Hill
▶ 	Start the motor.
▶ 	Shift to the proper gear.
▶ 	Signal.
▶ 	Look in the rearview mirror and look to the
rear.
▶ 	Release the parking brake.
▶ 	Check again for oncoming traffic. When
the lane is clear, drive out. It will be your
responsibility to wait for an opening and move
safely into the proper lane, as the drivers
already traveling have the right-of-way.
If you are using a standard transmission, when
you release the brake, you should accelerate and
release the clutch at the same time to keep the car
from rolling.
LOOK BACK AND
SIGNAL BEFORE
DRIVING FROM CURB
DOWN
HILL
UP HILL
(without curb)
UP HILL
(with curb)
Turn wheels TO THE CURB 	Turn wheels FROM THE CURB 	Turn wheels TO THE RIGHT

-- 47 of 72 --

48
CHAPTER 9
DISABLED PARKING PLACARD
Service Oklahoma issues a transferable parking permit to physically disabled residents who may
be the driver or the passenger of any vehicle. The permit is hung from the mirror. A car displaying
the physically disabled parking permit has special parking privileges throughout the state and
may park in spaces reserved for disabled parking.
Any person applying for a permit must submit an application completed by a physician. The
physician must state that the person has a physical disability, as required by law. A review test for
the driver license may be required.
Making a false statement in an application or unauthorized use of a permit is a misdemeanor.
Visit Service Oklahoma at service.ok.gov to apply online for a disabled parking permit.
UNLAWFUL PARKING
Laws are made to protect us from dangers that we may cause to other people and dangers that
others may cause us. Parking laws are intended to keep your car from being hit by someone else
and to keep your car, truck, van or motorcycle from endangering others.
It is illegal to park in these places:
1. 	On a sidewalk.
2. In front of a public or private driveway.
3. Within an intersection.
4. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
5. On a crosswalk.
6. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
7. Within 30 feet upon approaching any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of the roadway.
8. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
9. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or within 75 feet on the side of a
street opposite the entrance (when properly signposted).
10. Alongside or opposite any obstruction or street excavation when parking would obstruct
traffic.
11. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street (double
parking).
12. On any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or within a highway underpass.
13. Any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
THE LAW SAYS
No person shall stop, park or leave a vehicle unattended except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance of law or
the directions of a police officer or traffic-controlled device in any of the
places.

-- 48 of 72 --

49
CHAPTER 10
REMEMBER
THE “GOLDEN
RULE.” DRIVERS
SHOULD
PROTECT
EACH OTHER
BY DRIVING
DEFENSIVELY.
Sharing the Road
Your responsibility as a defensive driver includes making allowances for and adapting to the other
people and vehicles on the road. There are skills and techniques you should use for sharing the
road with pedestrians, bicycles, motorcycles, trains, trucks, farm equipment and horse-drawn
vehicles. Knowing what to do and how to do it can help you stay alive and avoid damaging your
vehicle or someone else’s.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH PEDESTRIANS
“Pedestrians” include people walking, skateboarders, in-line or roller skaters and the disabled who
use wheelchairs, walkers, tricycles or similar supports.
Pedestrians in a crosswalk have the right-of-way over most vehicles, whether the crosswalk
is marked or not.
Crosswalks are intended to encourage people to cross only at certain locations. As you know,
some people will cross when and where they want to, regardless of traffic signals, marked
crossings or even their own safety. As the person controlling a potentially dangerous machine, it’s
your job to “play it safe” where pedestrians are concerned and protect them when you see they
may be in danger.
▶ 	Be alert to people entering the roadway or crosswalks in any place where pedestrian traffic is
heavy.
▶ 	Yield to blind pedestrians carrying a white or chrome cane or using a guide dog.
▶ 	Be especially careful in school zones, school crossings or where children are playing.
▶ 	Yield to pedestrians using the sidewalk when you’re entering or leaving a driveway or alley.
▶ 	Don’t honk, gun your engine or do anything to rush or scare a pedestrian crossing in front of
your car, even if you have the legal right-of-way.
HELP THE UNSEEN PEDESTRIAN
A teenager steps into the crosswalk (or worse, into the roadway) on a four-lane city
street. The driver in the lane nearest her sees her and stops. But the drivers in the next
lane don’t see her and don’t know why the first driver stopped. They go ahead at full
speed. A pickup driver, several vehicles back in that second lane, reaches the girl’s path
just as she steps into view—and into danger.
If you are the driver in the stopped car, do everything you can to help protect that girl,
such as warning the drivers behind you with a “stop” hand signal or with several taps on
your brakes, flashing your brake lights.
If you see the car in the lane next to you, stop suddenly for no apparent reason, slow
down and look out. That driver may be stopped for a pedestrian.

-- 49 of 72 --

50
CHAPTER 10
SHARING THE ROAD WITH BICYCLES
Bicyclists have the same rights and responsibilities on the streets
that you do and in most cases, they must share the lane. When
you’re sharing the road with bicycles, you should always expect
the rider to make sudden moves. Trash, minor oil slicks, a pothole
or crack in the concrete, a barking dog, a parked car or a car door
opening and other surprises can force a bicycle rider to swerve
suddenly in front of you.
When overtaking and passing a bicycle proceeding in the same direction, the person driving a
motor vehicle shall exercise due care by leaving a safe distance between the motor vehicle and
the bicycle of not less than 3 feet until the motor vehicle is safely past the overtaken bicycle (Title
47-11-1208-A).
▶ 	Watch for bicycle riders turning in front of you without looking or signaling, especially if the
rider is a child.
▶ 	Allow at least 3 feet of room when passing a bicycle rider.
▶ 	Avoid passing between a bicyclist and oncoming vehicles on a two-lane road. Slow down and
allow vehicles to pass. Then move to the left to allow plenty of room to pass the rider safely.
▶ 	NEVER pass a bicycle if the street is too narrow. Wait until there is enough room to let you
pass safely.
▶ 	Residential areas are danger zones: Bicyclists have all the rights AND responsibilities of a
person driving a car and are subject to all vehicle laws.
▶ 	Watch out for bikes coming out from driveways or from behind parked cars or other
obstructions.
▶ 	If you are about to pass a bicycle on a narrow roadway and
you think the rider doesn’t know you’re coming, honk your
horn briefly as a signal that you’re going to pass. Don’t blast
your horn or otherwise startle or try to intimidate the rider.
▶ 	At night, watch the side of the road for bicyclists. They are
required to have a front light and rear reflector, but lights
from approaching traffic may make them hard to see.
▶ 	Merge with bicycle traffic when preparing for a right turn.
Don’t turn directly across the path of a bicyclist.
Bicycle riders are required to ride as far right in the lane as
possible only when the lane can be safely shared by a car and a
bicycle, side by side. Even then, there are certain times when a
bike can take the full lane.
A bicyclist can ride in the full lane when:
▶ 	The rider is overtaking and passing another vehicle going in
the same direction.
▶ 	The bicyclist is getting in place for a left turn at an
intersection or turning left into a private road or driveway.
▶ 	There are unsafe conditions in the roadway, such as
parked cars, moving vehicles or machinery, fixed obstacles,
pedestrians, animals, potholes and debris.
▶ 	The lane is too narrow for both a car and a bicycle to safely
share the lane. In this case, it is safest to let the bicycle take
the full lane.
▶ 	If you see this flag on a bicycle, slow down; the bicycle rider
may have impaired hearing.
▶ 	All bicyclists must ride in the correct lane of traffic.
BIKE RIDER
DO NOT pass
between a bicycle
and oncoming cars.
Turning right,
merge right.
Wrong Way

-- 50 of 72 --

51
CHAPTER 10
SHARING THE ROAD WITH MOTORCYCLES
Research shows that two-thirds of car/motorcycle collisions are caused not by the
motorcyclist but by the driver who turned in front of the motorcycle. The driver didn’t see
the motorcycle at all or didn’t see them until it was too late to avoid the collision.
Why Drivers Don’t See Motorcyclists
▶ 	Motorists tend to look for other cars rather than motorcycles.
▶ 	The profile of a motorcycle is narrow and the body is short, making it harder to see and
making it harder for a driver to estimate its distance and speed.
▶ 	Motorcycle riding requires frequent lane movements to adjust to changing road
and traffic conditions.
Motorcycles have the right to use the lane. Riders need the lane’s full width to respond to
and handle hazards such as potholes, shifting traffic blocking their view or blocking them
from being seen and strong winds or blasts of air from passing vehicles. You should not try
to share a lane with a motorcycle and respect its space and position in traffic. All operators
of motorcycles must have an M endorsement on their driver license.
Techniques for Sharing the Road with Motorcycles
▶ 	Passing—Pass as you would pass a car and don’t pass too close or too fast, as the blast of
air can blow a motorcycle out of control.
▶ 	Left turns—Always signal your intention to turn. Watch for oncoming motorcycles.
▶ 	Follow at a distance—Allow at least a three-second following distance so the cyclist
has enough time to maneuver or stop in an emergency. Both cyclists and drivers are
more likely to make bad decisions if there is not enough stopping distance or time to
see and react to conditions.
▶ 	Check your blind spots when changing lanes—Cyclists riding alongside a lane of cars
are often out of the view of the driver. An unsuspecting driver may change lanes and clip
or hit a motorcycle.
▶ 	Anticipate motorcyclists’ maneuvers—A cyclist will change lane position to prepare for
upcoming traffic conditions. Expect and allow room for the rider to adjust to road hazards
that you can’t see. At intersections, where most collisions and injuries occur, wait until the
rider’s intentions are absolutely clear (turning or going straight) before you move into the
path of travel. Be even more careful in difficult driving conditions—rain, wet roads, ice and
heavy winds—when the motorcycle’s braking and handling abilities are impaired.
▶ 	Pay extra attention at night—You can easily misjudge distance because the single headlight
and single taillight of a motorcycle can blend
into the lights of other vehicles. Always dim your
headlights as you would for cars and trucks.
▶ 	Drive aware—Whenever you are on the road or at
an intersection with a motorcycle, use extra caution
and care. Learn to watch for the narrow profile.
▶ 	Endorsement—Any individual who operates a
motorcycle must have a motorcycle endorsement.
▶ 	Windshields—State statutes require that all
vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality,
size and thickness to protect the operator
from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such
windshield, the operator shall wear ANSI-approved
goggles or face shield material designed to protect
against foreign objects.
SIDE MIRROR VISION
BLIND SPOT
BLIND SPOT

-- 51 of 72 --

52
CHAPTER 10
SHARING THE ROAD WITH TRUCKS
You will always be sharing the road with trucks because
they haul more freight more miles than any other form of
transportation.
In America, 72 percent of goods are shipped by truck and in
most communities trucks are the only form of delivery.
Truck drivers are always watching for smaller vehicles and
working to avoid collisions. There are some techniques that
you can use to help them—and yourself—share the road
safely.
Safety Rules for Following a Truck:
▶ 	Stay far enough back so you can see the roadway ahead
clearly.
▶ 	Position your vehicle outside the truck’s “blind spot,” and be sure the truck driver can see you
in the rearview mirror. If you can’t see the truck’s mirror, the driver can’t see you. A truck’s
blind spots are immediately in front on either side of the cab and up to 200 feet in the rear.
A trucker may not be able to see the road directly in front of the cab. If the tractor has a
long hood, the trucker may not be able to see the first 10-20 feet of concrete in front of the
bumper—plenty of room for a car to slip unnoticed into a dangerous position.
▶ 	If you’re stopped behind a truck on an uphill grade, stay to the left in your lane so the driver can
see you. When stopped in a traffic lane, leave extra space in front of your car in case the truck
rolls back slightly when it starts to move.
▶ 	Dim your lights at night. Bright lights reflected in the mirrors can blind the driver.
▶ 	In rainy conditions, stay back. Spray and splash from the rear wheels can cover your windshield
with sheets of water or mud.
Passing a Truck
▶ 	Check to your front and rear and move into the passing
lane only if it is clear and you are in a legal passing zone.
Let the driver know you are passing by blinking your
headlights, especially at night. The driver will make it
easier for you by staying to the far side of the lane.
▶ 	Because of their weight, trucks travel faster downhill
and slower uphill. You may have to increase your speed
to pass a truck on a downhill grade. Complete your pass
as quickly as possible and don’t stay alongside the
truck. After you pass, maintain your speed. Don’t pass
a truck, then slow down, making the truck driver brake
while traveling downhill.
▶ 	If the driver blinks the truck’s lights after you pass, it’s
a signal that you are cleared to pull back in front of the
truck. Move back only when you can see the front of the
truck in your rearview mirror.
▶ 	When a truck passes you, you can help the driver by
keeping to the far side of your lane and reducing your
speed slightly. Never speed up as a truck is passing.
▶ 	When you meet a truck coming from the opposite
direction, keep as far as possible to the right side of the
road to avoid being sideswiped and to reduce the wind
turbulence between you and the truck. The turbulence
pushes vehicles apart; it does not suck them together.
PASS TRUCKS
WITH CARE AND
CONFIDENCE
Many people are afraid
of passing two-trailer
trucks. They’re afraid of
the passing distance
and think that maybe
the second trailer could
swerve out of control and
hit them. Studies show
that these trucks are just
as safe as single-trailer
trucks and you can pass
them and all trucks, using
care and skill, without
being afraid.
1020 FT.
200 FT.
TRUCK’S BLIND SPOTS

-- 52 of 72 --

53
CHAPTER 10
Risky Situations with Trucks
A truck making a right turn—Watch for turn signals. Trucks make wide
right turns and often must leave an open space on the right side. Do
not move into that space or try to pass a truck if it might be making a
right turn. If you are between the truck and the curb, the driver may not
be able to see you and your car can be crunched or sideswiped.
A truck backing up—When a truck is trying to back into a loading dock,
there may be no choice except to block the roadway for a short time.
Never try to cross behind a truck when it’s preparing to back up. This is
a high-collision situation because you will be in the driver’s blind spot.
Give the driver plenty of room and wait patiently for the few minutes it
takes to complete the maneuver.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH TRAINS
Actually, you don’t share the road with trains—you
stop and let them have the right-of-way. You must
ALWAYS yield to trains because:
▶ 	A train traveling at 55 mph takes a mile or
more to stop.
A train collision is always the fault of the car driver.
Nearly half the car/train collisions in America
happen at crossroads with lights, bells or gates and
two-thirds of the crashes happen in full daylight.
Why?
Impatience—Drivers don’t want to wait the 30
seconds to 2 minutes average time it takes for the
train to pass through the intersection. They try to
beat the train. Don’t let yourself or your family and
friends be one of these statistics. In Oklahoma in
2021, there were 45 crashes involving trains, with
three fatalities and 25 persons injured.
Negligence—When drivers see a railroad crossing
sign or warning, they don’t respect the potential
for danger: they cross the tracks without looking,
listening or stopping. Most collisions occur within
25 miles of the driver’s home.
FOR THE “RIGHT TURN SQUEEZE”
LOOK, LISTEN AND LIVE
Operation Lifesaver is a program to teach railroad crossing
safety. Since Operation Lifesaver started in 1972, collisions
like this have been reduced by 50 percent.

-- 53 of 72 --

54
CHAPTER 10
THE LAW SAYS
Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet
but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until they can do so safely when:
a. 	A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives a warning of the immediate approach of a train.
b. 	A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a
train.
c. 	A train approaching within approximately 1500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance
and the train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard.
d. 	An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
Warning Devices for Highway-Rail Crossings
All Oklahoma public highway-rail crossings have been marked with one or more of the
following warning devices. Over 1,200 of these crossings have gates, lights or bells to warn you of
approaching trains.
Advance Warning Signs—Advance warning signs mean a highway-rail crossing is ahead. The
signs are located far enough from the crossing to allow you to stop before reaching the crossing.
Pavement Markings—An R X R and a stop line may be painted on the pavement in front of a
crossing. Always stay behind the painted stop line while waiting for a passing train.
Railroad Crossbuck Signs—Crossbucks are found at most public crossings. Treat them the same
as a YIELD sign—slow down and prepare to stop if you see or hear a train approaching. If there
is more than one track, a sign below the crossbuck shows the number of tracks at this crossing.
Knowing the number of tracks is important for knowing when to wait and when to go.
Flashing Light Signals—Flashing lights mean a train is coming. Always stop when the lights are
flashing. Cross only when the lights stop flashing. If there is more than one track, make sure all
tracks are clear before beginning to cross.
Gates and Flashing Signals—Stop when the lights begin to flash and before the gate is lowered
across your lane. Remain stopped until the gates are raised and lights have stopped flashing.
Stop Sign—Stop completely and look both ways before driving across the tracks.
3
TRACKS
3
TRACKS

-- 54 of 72 --

55
CHAPTER 10
Safety Rules for Highway-Railway Crossings
▶ 	Slow down, keep alert and watch for the crossing sign or signal.
▶ 	Look both ways and listen because you may have to stop.
▶ 	Expect a train on any track at any time.
▶ 	Don’t get trapped on the tracks. Never move onto a railroad track unless you are
certain you can drive across safely. Once you have started across the tracks, keep
going.
▶ 	Never drive around the gates. If the gates are down, stop behind the gate. It’s
against the law to drive through lowered gates. Don’t cross the tracks until the
gates are raised and the lights have stopped flashing.
▶ 	If you are crossing the tracks and the warning lights begin flashing or the gates
start coming down, don’t stop. KEEP MOVING! The warning signals will allow
enough time for you to finish driving through the crossing before the train
arrives. The gate on the far side of the tracks will not block you in. If you stop and
try to back up, your vehicle may stall.
▶ 	Watch out for the second train. When you are at
a multiple-track crossing and the last car of the
train passes by, don’t go until you’re sure that no
other train is coming on another track from either
direction.
▶ 	Get out of your vehicle if it stalls on the tracks. If
your vehicle is physically on the train tracks at a
grade crossing and the lights begin to flash, you
may only have 20 seconds to escape before the train makes it to your location.
Twenty seconds is the minimal amount of time that it takes a train to reach the
grade crossing once the warning lights activate.
▶ 	Once outside, run at a 45 degree angle away from the tracks in the direction that
the train is coming, as shown in the picture to the right, then immediately dial 911
▶ 	If you are stuck on the tracks and there are
no warning lights or the warning lights have
not activated yet, get out of your vehicle and
immediately dial 911 and the ENS (Emergency
Notification System) number located on the
railroad crossing posts or the metal control
box near the tracks. Provide the location,
crossing number (if posted) and the road or
highway that intersects the tracks. Be sure to
specify that a vehicle is on the tracks!
▶ 	Never race a train. You will never have a
second chance if you lose the race.
▶ 	Watch for vehicles that must stop at highway-
railway crossings.
• 	Trucks carrying hazardous materials
• 	School bus
• 	Church bus
• 	Passenger bus
Be prepared to stop behind them.
▶ 	Never pass at a highway-rail crossing. Don’t pass cars or bicyclists. The bicycle
tires can get caught on the tracks and the rider can be thrown across your path.
▶ 	Don’t misjudge the train’s speed and distance. Because of the large size of a train,
it appears to be moving much slower than you think. If you see or hear a train,
STOP and WAIT for the train to pass.
▶ 	Be especially careful at night for highway-railway crossings. It’s very hard to judge
a train’s speed and distance at night. If you see or hear a train, STOP and WAIT for
the train to pass.
If this happens to
you, remember
the word “GO,”
as in GET OUT of
your vehicle!
If you are stuck on the
tracks and there are no
warning lights or the
warning lights have
not activated yet, get
out of the vehicle and
immediately dial 911
and the Emergency
Notifications System
(ENS). The ENS is a blue
and white emergency sign
with a unique number
assigned to each grade
crossing and identifies
the exact location of the
crossing to the railroads.

-- 55 of 72 --

56
CHAPTER 10
SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES
Be alert for slow-moving vehicles, especially in rural areas. Watch for tractors, combines and
other farm equipment moving from one field to another and traveling on state highways. The
equipment can be very large and use more than one traffic lane. In most cases, these vehicles will
be traveling at less than 25 mph. Coming over the top of a hill at 65 mph to find a large, slow-
moving tractor in front of you is a frightening and dangerous experience. Expect the unexpected
and be prepared to protect yourself and your passengers.
In some areas of Oklahoma, you may be sharing the road with animal-drawn vehicles. They have
the same rights to use the road as a motor vehicle and must follow the same rules of the road.
They are subject to heavy damage and injury to the occupants if hit by a car. Warning signs will be
posted in areas where you are likely to find animal-drawn vehicles. Be alert!
Slow Moving
Vehicle Emblem
This emblem is used
on Slow Moving
Vehicles (SMVs)
such as agricultural
equipment, highway and
roadside construction
equipment and highway
maintenance equipment
traveling on public
highways at speeds of 25
MPH or less.
Notes

-- 56 of 72 --

57
CHAPTER 11
Driving Tips
USING HIGH AND LOW
HEADLIGHT BEAMS PROPERLY
Your vehicle’s headlights help you see while you drive. They also
make it easier for other drivers to see your vehicle. Dim your high
beam headlights to low beams within 1000 feet of an oncoming
vehicle or within 600 feet of the vehicle you are following. Use your
headlights:
■ 	When a road sign state that headlights must be used.
■ 	Beginning 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before
sunrise.
■ 	Use high beams in open country if there are no other cars
nearby. Speed should be slower than it is by day.
■ 	Use low beams where there are streetlights, fog, rain, snow or
adverse weather conditions.
USING A STANDARD TRANSMISSION
With a standard or manual transmission, you can control the gear-speed ratio and use your gears,
rather than your brakes, to help slow down your car. Many drivers enjoy the feeling and control of
driving cars and trucks with a standard transmission.
Techniques for Smooth and Effective Shifting
■ 	Hold the clutch pedal all the way down when starting the motor, shifting gears and when
your speed drops below 10 mph as you’re coming to a stop.
■ 	Don’t “ride the clutch,” meaning don’t drive with your foot resting on the clutch pedal.
■ 	Practice getting smooth coordination in using the clutch and accelerator pedals.
■ 	Don’t coast with the gears in neutral or with the clutch pedal pushed down except when
shifting gears.
■ 	When going down steep hills, put your car in a lower gear.
■ 	Coasting on a downgrade with the clutch engaged or the vehicle in neutral is a violation of
OS§ Title 47, Chapter 11-1107.
GOOD DRIVING POSTURE
You will be driving more effectively and with less fatigue if you are comfortable, your body is well-
aligned in your car seat, you are the proper distance from the steering wheel and the pedals and
if you can use your mirrors to the best advantage.
■ 	Adjust the seat to a comfortable position so you can reach the pedals easily and have good
vision.
■ 	Adjust the rearview mirror so that you can see the road behind.
■ 	Check and adjust your left outside rearview mirror.
■ 	Be sure there’s nothing on the front seat that can fall on the floor and distract you.
■ 	Fasten your seat belt.

-- 57 of 72 --

58
CHAPTER 11
■ 	Use a solid, strong grip on the steering wheel:
■ 	You should have at least 1/3 of the wheel between your hands to
have a strong turning force with either hand. Think of the steering
wheel as a clock. Generally, your left hand should be between 9:00
and 10:30 and your right hand between 2:00 and 4:00.
■ 	Don’t drive with your elbow out the window. You don’t have full
control of the steering wheel and a side-swipe collision could take
off your arm.
AVOID CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
You can’t see, smell or taste it, but carbon monoxide gas from your
engine can kill you. Carbon monoxide is most likely to leak into your car
when the heater is running, when your exhaust system is not working properly or when you’re
in heavy traffic and breathing exhaust fumes from other cars. A faulty exhaust system can leak
poisonous fumes into the back seat area where children may be sitting or sleeping.
Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning:
■ 	You feel drowsy and/or dizzy.
■ 	Lights seem brighter.
■ 	The skin has a blue color; lips turn blue.
■ 	Your forehead tightens.
Pull off the road, park and turn off the motor. Open your windows. Relax
or get out and walk around until you feel better. A child or passenger
overcome with carbon monoxide may require artificial respiration or
medical attention.
How to avoid carbon monoxide poisoning:
■ 	Have your exhaust system checked regularly by a reputable
mechanic.
■ 	Be alert for any unusual roar from under the car.
■ 	Never let the engine run in a closed garage.
■ 	In congested traffic, close the fresh-air vent.
■ 	On the highways in cold weather, open the fresh-air vent.
DRIVING OUT-OF-STATE
Before starting on a vacation or business trip, be sure you have a physical copy of your vehicle
insurance and registration in your vehicle in accordance with Oklahoma law.
CAR PHONE SAFETY
Oklahoma law requires drivers to give their full attention to the road. Unfortunately for many
Oklahomans, distracted driving is trending.
Distracted Driving is extremely risky behavior and puts you and your passengers in danger, as
well as pedestrians and bicyclists sharing the road.

-- 58 of 72 --

59
CHAPTER 11
There are three main categories of driver distraction:
■ 	Visual: Taking your eyes off the road
■ 	Manual: Taking your hands off the steering wheel
■ 	Cognitive: Thinking about anything other than driving
Distracted driving, which includes any activity that diverts attention from driving, can be very
dangerous. In 2014 alone, more than 3,000 people were killed and an additional 431,000 were
injured in motor vehicle crashes involving distracted drivers nationwide.
Distracted driving can include eating and drinking, talking to people in your vehicle, fiddling with
the stereo or texting and driving.
Safety tips for phoning while driving:
■ 	Whenever possible, pull off the road before calling from your car.
■ 	Do not unbuckle your seat belt to reach for a phone.
■ 	Use the memory dial function and voice-activated dialing when possible to avoid taking your
eyes off the road.
■ 	Do not allow the phone to distract or disturb you while driving.
■ 	DO NOT eat, drink, light a cigarette, read or write while you talk and drive.
■ 	Make your calls as short as possible; know when to hang up.
■ 	Ask your passenger to handle all phone calls for you.
■ 	Know your own limits. If you recognize that using a car phone distracts you from driving
safely, limit your use or simply pull off the road when you’re on the phone.
As of 2015, it is illegal to text while driving in Oklahoma. Commercial drivers or public transit
drivers are also prohibited from making hand-held phone calls while driving.
PAY ATTENTION – BE ALERT
In 2009, 10 fatal crashes involved a driver distracted by an electronic device. Learner's Permit
or Intermediate License holders can be suspended or have their license canceled for using a
hand-held electronic device while operating a motor vehicle for non-life-threatening emergency
purposes.
ANIMALS
There may be a time when an animal suddenly runs in front of your vehicle. DO NOT swerve to
avoid hitting the animal. This may result in a more serious crash than if your vehicle collided with
the animal.
To reduce your chance of having an accident with an animal:
■ 	Use caution when driving at dawn or dusk; this is when animals are most active.
■ 	Be extra alert when driving on roadways marked with animal crossing signs.
■ 	Scan the sides of the road and watch for the reflection of your headlights in the eyes of
animals.
■ 	Deer/vehicle crashes most often occur from October to December.
■ 	Slow down when approaching an animal standing near the roadway.

-- 59 of 72 --

60
CHAPTER 11
EMERGENCY KIT FOR YOUR CAR
STAY
ALERT
. . . STAY
ALIVE!
To avoid fatigue
on long trips,
take a break
occasionally.
MOST VEHICLES WILL BECOME BUOYANT IN 2 FEET (24 INCHES) OF WATER OR LESS.
The delay and frustration from a roadside breakdown can be reduced if
you’re prepared for roadside emergencies. Carry these items in your car to
be prepared for an emergency and to help other drivers along the road.
Emergency Kit
TRAFFIC FACTS
Oklahoma has more than 750 troopers enforcing its traffic laws and protecting 2,481,432 licensed
drivers (and their passengers) on over 111,994 miles of roads. From concrete turnpikes to plain dirt
roads, from flat highways in the panhandle to the winding curves of “Green Country” in the east,
Oklahoma has a wide variety of terrain and driving conditions that require a variety of driving
techniques. When you are licensed to drive in Oklahoma, you will be sharing the road with 3.8
million registered vehicles and 96,632 motorcycles.
FLOOD DYNAMICS
Water weighs about 62.4 pounds per cubic foot and typically flows downstream at 6 to 12 miles
an hour. When a vehicle stalls in the water, the water’s momentum is transferred to the car. For
each foot the water rises, 500 pounds of lateral force are applied to the car. For each foot the
water rises, the car displaces 1,500 pounds of water. In effect, the car weighs 1,500 pounds less for
each foot the water rises! Most vehicles will float in just 2 feet (24 inches) of water, even SUVs!
All motorists should remember the following Flood Safety Rules:
■ 	Cars can easily stall in the water and be carried away in any current.
■ 	Most vehicles will be swept away by less than 2 feet (24 inches) of running water.
■ 	Do not try to cross a flooded road or stream in your vehicle.
■ 	Flashlight with good batteries
■ 	Inflated spare tire and tire jack
■ 	Oil for loosening lug nuts
■ 	Rags
■ 	Cell Phone
■ 	Water
■ 	Blanket
■ 	Adjustable crescent wrench
■ 	Emergency flares
■ 	Jumper cables
■ 	Heavy-duty lug wrench
■ 	Windshield sunscreen or sign
with “send help” on it
■ 	Tarp
■ 	Tire gauge and screwdriver set
■ 	First-aid kit
■ 	Bungee cord or strong rope
■ 	Candles and matches

-- 60 of 72 --

61
CHAPTER 11
Notes
■ 	Do not drive around barricades at low-water crossings.
■ 	Be especially vigilant at night or when traveling on unfamiliar roads.
■ 	Do not drive into or attempt to drive across flowing water.
■ 	Observe any water level indicators at low-water crossings, remembering that 6 inches of
water may be enough to cause you to lose control of your vehicle.
■ 	Be aware that beneath the water’s surface, roadbeds may have been washed away.
■ 	If you choose to abandon your vehicle, respect the force of the water. You can be knocked off
your feet by 6 inches of fast-moving water
If you encounter a flooded roadway, TURN AROUND, DON’T DROWN.
YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES AFTER A CRASH
If you are involved in a collision that results in death, injury or property
damage, you must- Remain Calm.
1. 	Stop and call 911 or local law enforcement.
2. Turn on hazard lights.
3. If anyone is hurt, you must get help immediately but DO NOT try to
move an injured person unless it is a life-or-death necessity.
4. If the crash is minor and your vehicle is blocking the flow of traffic, you
must move it or have it moved.
5. Exchange vehicle, witness and driver information (name, address,
phone number, driver license, vehicle registration number and
insurance).
6. Take photos.
7. DO NOT blame other people or accept blame, and DO NOT discuss
the accident. Wait for law enforcement officers and answer questions
truthfully and calmly.
If the collision involves a parked car or property and you can’t locate the owner, leave the
driver’s and vehicle owner’s name and address, and provide the information from the insurance
verification form on the damaged property where the owner will find it.
The investigation officer will complete a report and place it on file. You should contact your
insurance company as soon as possible, report the accident and provide the required information.

-- 61 of 72 --

62
CHAPTER 12
Alcohol, Drugs and Driving̶
Oklahoma Is Tough on DUIs
DRUGS AFFECT YOUR DRIVING
Everyone knows that mind-altering drugs like alcohol, marijuana, tranquilizers,
antidepressants, speed and meth can change the way you see things and the way
you react—mentally and physically. But not everyone realizes that many prescription drugs and
even over-the-counter drugs (such as cold, hay fever, pain medications and diet pills) can slow
your reaction time, make you dizzy or nervous and impair (damage, weaken or worsen) your
concentration and vision.
You never know what will happen. The same drugs and the same amounts of drugs, will affect
each person differently. Also, the same drug can affect you more at one time than another.
Weight, emotional state, heart and breathing rate, food intake, amount of sleep, tolerance for
a drug and other factors, can all influence the way you react to drugs. Even a small amount of
alcohol or drugs will reduce your ability to judge a driving situation, decide what to do and act
quickly.
Mixing drugs can be especially dangerous, because they react with each other and multiply
the harmful effects on your concentration and coordination. This is especially true when one of
those drugs is alcohol. Mixing alcohol and drugs may multiply the effects of the alcohol and the
combination can create additional effects, including serious health problems—even death.
ALCOHOL—WHY DRINKING AND
DRIVING IS SO DANGEROUS
Alcohol moves quickly to your stomach, into your
blood and to all parts of your body. Driving skills,
especially your judgment, are affected almost
immediately. Alcohol puts good judgment on
hold—you don’t know when you’ve had too much
to drink until it’s too late. By the time you feel
it, your judgment and coordination are already
impaired.
Alcohol slows your reflexes and reaction time,
reduces your ability to see clearly and makes you less alert. As the amount of alcohol in your
body increases, your judgment will worsen and your driving skill will decrease. You will have
trouble judging distances, speeds and the movement of other vehicles and you will have trouble
controlling your vehicle.
Oklahoma law enforcement is tough on drunk drivers. Alcohol is responsible for about 1/4 of all
highway deaths. More young people are crippled, maimed and killed by drinking and driving or
by drunk drivers than by any other cause. If you drink or use drugs and drive, there is a greater
possibility that you will be caught because Oklahoma has improved its laws and increased its law
enforcement against drinking drivers.
DUI
IF YOU DRINK,
DON’T DRIVE
Consider this sobering
fact about alcohol—it’s
not what you drink; it’s
how much. A 12-ounce
can of beer, a 5-ounce
glass of wine and a
cocktail with 1.5 ounces
of 80-proof distilled
spirits all contain the
same amount of alcohol.
DOING DRUGS
CAN DO YOU IN
In an emergency, you
need good judgment,
good physical
coordination and fast
reaction time to avoid
injury, damage or death.

-- 62 of 72 --

63
CHAPTER 12
THE LAW SAYS
If your license is revoked
under the Oklahoma
Implied Consent Law,
the revocation period
will be from 180 days to 2
years, depending on your
previous driving record.
PENALTIES
FOR IMPAIRED
DRIVING
BAC OVER 0.05
BUT LESS THAN 0.08
On conviction, a fine
of $100–$500, up to 6
months in jail or both
Oklahoma has tough penalties for anyone driving under the influence or impairment of alcohol
and drugs, especially for drivers under 21. The consequences of arrest and conviction will remain
on a driver’s record. If you are arrested for driving or riding a motorcycle under the influence of
drugs, the conviction and penalties can affect you for the rest of your life.
OKLAHOMA IMPLIED CONSENT LAWS
The very act of driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle means that you have
agreed to take one or more tests to determine your blood alcohol content (BAC). This law applies
to everyone, residents and non-residents alike. Refusal to take the test upon request by a law
enforcement officer will result in an automatic revocation of your driving privilege, even if you
have not been drinking. If you have been drinking, the test will determine the BAC level. If the
BAC level is 0.08 or more (or any measurable amount if you are under 21 years old), your driver
license will be revoked—even if you are not convicted in court of driving under the influence (DUI).
CRIMINAL EVIDENCE
AND PENALTIES
Whether or not a BAC test indicates you are legally
intoxicated is not the real issue. Impairment of
judgment and skill begins well below the legal
limit. Observations and information gathered by
the arresting officer are also evidence that may be
used in court and can result in a conviction without
a BAC test. Oklahoma law prohibits driving a motor
vehicle while impaired by alcohol or other substances.
An alcohol concentration more than 0.05 is relevant
evidence that the driver’s ability to drive was impaired.
When Service Oklahoma receives notice of a conviction,
Service Oklahoma will also suspend the person’s driving privilege
as follows:
■ 	First suspension—30 days
■ 	Second suspension—6
months
■ 	Third suspension—1 year
DUI stands for “Driving Under
the Influence” and means that
a driver is intoxicated by drugs
or alcohol or both.
If the BAC is 0.08 or more or
any measurable amount for
drivers under 21 (see Zero
Tolerance, page 64) or if the
arresting officer’s observations
of the driver’s behavior,
appearance and mannerisms
lead to a conviction for
DUI, the penalties are
imprisonment AND a fine.
First offense
■ 	a misdemeanor
■ 	imprisonment in jail for not less than
ten days nor more than 1 year and
■ 	a fine of not more than $1,000
Second offense within 10 years
■ 	a felony
■ 	imprisonment for not less than 1 year,
not to exceed 5 years and
■ 	a fine of not more than $2,500
Second felony offense
■ 	imprisonment for not less than 1 year,
not to exceed 7 years and
■ 	fine of not more than $5,000, third or
subsequent offense
Third or subsequent offense
■ 	imprisonment for not less than 1 year,
not to exceed 10 years and
■ 	fine of not more than $5,000
PENALTIES FOR DUI—BAC .08 OR MORE

-- 63 of 72 --

64
CHAPTER 12
When Service Oklahoma receives notice of the DUI conviction, Service Oklahoma
will also suspend or revoke the person’s driving privilege unless the privilege has
already been revoked because the BAC test was refused or failed during the same
incident. The license will be suspended as follows:
■ 	For 180 days on the first revocation
■ 	For 1 year, if there was a prior DUI or drug-related revocation within 10 years
■ 	For 2 years if, there were two or more DUI or drug-related revocations within 10
years
Additional costs commonly associated with an alcohol-related arrest include:
■ 	Lawyer’s fees
■ 	Lost time off work for court and alcohol education programs
■ 	Alternative transportation costs while your license is suspended
■ 	Court costs, separate from the fines
■ 	An Alcohol and Drug Substance Abuse evaluation (ADSAC)
■ 	An Ignition interlock device installed in your vehicle
■ 	License reinstatement fees
■ 	Increased insurance rates
■ 	Psychological and emotional costs of being a “drunk driver”
■ 	Struggle for jobs, money and education: If you are convicted of a felony for a DUI, it
may adversely affect your applications for loans and financing, college admission and
scholarships and more, for the rest of your life.
OTHER DRUGS AND DRIVING
The effects of drugs other than alcohol can impair your thinking and driving even more than
alcohol. Remember that many prescription drugs taken in combination with alcohol or other
drugs can be deadly.
Prescription and Over-the-Counter Drugs—Before you take a drug, check the label for warnings
about side effects such as drowsiness or nervousness. Diet and pep pills can make you more
alert for a short time, but later they can bring on nervousness, dizziness, poor concentration and
distorted vision. If you aren’t sure if it’s safe to take the drug and drive, ask a pharmacist or doctor.
Marijuana - Research shows that people who use marijuana make more driving mistakes than
other drivers, have more trouble adjusting to glare and have more arrests for traffic violations.
Illegal Drugs - illegal drugs are not good for your health and affect your ability to drive safely. For
example, drivers on amphetamines are four times more likely to be involved in a car crash.
“ZERO TOLERANCE” FOR DRIVERS UNDER 21
Oklahoma DUI laws are very strict for people under 21. Oklahoma wants to keep its young people
driving and alive (See the next section, “Additional penalties for drivers under 18,” page 65. A
collision caused by mixing drinking or drugs and driving can wipe out a hopeful future. A DUI
conviction for teenagers and young adults can literally ruin their lives before they have a chance
to find out what life is all about.

-- 64 of 72 --

65
CHAPTER 12
THE LAW SAYS:
It is unlawful and punishable, as stated below, for any person under 21 years of age to drive,
operate or be in actual physical control (APC) of a motor vehicle within our state who:
■ 	Has ANY measurable quantity of alcohol in the person’s blood or breath at the time a
test is administered.
■ 	Exhibits evidence of being under the influence of any other intoxicating substance; or
■ 	Exhibits evidence of the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating
substance.
Lengths of License Revocation
When a person’s driver license is revoked based on the “Zero Tolerance Law,” the periods of
revocation are as follows:
■ 	First conviction or offense for driving under the influence (DUI), actual physical control
(APC), refusal of the breath or blood test or a measurable amount of BAC, the revocation
would be for a period of SIX MONTHS.
■ 	Second conviction or offense for DUI, APC or refusal of the breath or blood test or
a measurable amount of BAC, the second revocation would be for a period of 12
MONTHS.
■ 	If you are less than 16 years of age at the time or will be less than 16 at the end of the
cancellation, Service Oklahoma shall extend the cancellation until you are 16 years of
age.
In addition to the mandatory revocation of the driving privilege:
Fines and Penalties
■ 	First conviction—Fine of $100–$500 or community service or
treatment program or any combination of fine, community service
or treatment program.
■ 	Second or subsequent conviction—Fine of $100–$1,000 or
community service or treatment program or any combination of
fine, community service or treatment program.
SAFETY TIP
Protect yourself and
other people. If you drink,
don’t drive.
Don’t let your friends
drive drunk. Drinking
and driving is dumb!
ADDITIONAL PENALTIES FOR PERSONS UNDER 18
If you are under the age of 18, a court is required to notify Service Oklahoma of any offense that
you commit, including any crime, violation, infraction, traffic offense or other offense involving
or relating to the possession, use, sale, purchase, transportation, distribution, manufacture or
consumption of beer, alcohol or any beverage containing alcohol: and to any crime, violation,
infraction, traffic offense or other offense involving or related to consuming, ingesting, inhaling,
injecting or absorbing any controlled dangerous substance as defined by Oklahoma law; or any
substance which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected or absorbed into the human
body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing or other
sensory or motor functions.
When the court makes this notification, Service Oklahoma is required to cancel or deny a person
a driver license for a determined period of time as recommended by the court or required by law.
PENALTIES FOR
PERSONS UNDER 18
At the discretion of the court,
a period of:
■ 	6 months
■ 	1 year
■ 	2 years or until the person
attains the age of 21 years,
whichever period of time
is longer

-- 65 of 72 --

66
CHAPTER 12
Notes
DUI

-- 66 of 72 --

67
CHAPTER 13
Violations and Penalties
If your license is suspended or revoked, you can’t apply for a new license until you are reinstated and
you can’t legally drive until your license is restored. Driving with a suspended or revoked license is a
serious crime and the punishment can be severe.
UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE AND/OR IDENTIFICATION CARD
Your license is a legal document, the property of the state of Oklahoma and it is against the law
to use it to misrepresent yourself in any way or to allow anyone else to use your license.
Many of the purchases of alcohol consumed by our young adults are aided by the possession of
fake identification cards or driver licenses. With the increased capabilities of today’s computers, a
scanned identification card or driver license is easily duplicated and modified.
The Oklahoma Legislature has given the Department of Public Safety Identity Verification Unit
new tools to combat fake identification cards and driver licenses by allowing the cancellation of
any identification card or driver license for any of the following violations. Your ID card or driver
license may be canceled if you:
■ 	Loan your license or identification card to any other person or knowingly
permit another to use it.
■ 	Display or cause or permit to be displayed or possess a license or
identification card issued to you that has altered information for the date of
birth, expiration date, sex, height, eye color, weight or license card number.
■ 	Fail or refuse to surrender to Service Oklahoma upon its lawful demand
any license or identification card that has been suspended, revoked or
canceled.
■ 	Permit any unlawful use of a license or identification card issued to you.
■ 	Create, publish or otherwise manufacture an Oklahoma or other state
license or identification card or facsimile thereof or create, manufacture or
possess an engraved plate or other such device for printing an Oklahoma
or other state license or identification card or facsimile thereof, except as
authorized by law.
■ 	Display or cause or permit to be displayed or knowingly possess any state
counterfeit or fictitious license or identification card.
■ 	Display or cause to be displayed or knowingly possess any state license or
identification card bearing a fictitious or forged name or signature.
■ 	Display or cause or permit to be displayed or knowingly possess any state
license or identification card bearing the photograph of any person, other
than the person named as licensee.
■ 	Display or represent as one’s own any license or identification card not
issued to you for the purpose of committing fraud in any commercial
transaction or to mislead a peace officer in the performance of their duties.
■ 	Use a false or fictitious name on any application for a license or
identification card.
It’s a felony for anyone who is authorized to issue licenses to knowingly
participate in licensing someone not entitled to a license or who lies on the
application or tries to use another person’s picture.
OKLAHOMA
4d Lic. No.
USA
3 DOB
9 Class
9a End
12 Restr
1
2
8
11/16/1907
A13456789
DRIVER LICENSE
SERVICE OKLAHOMA
6015 N. CLASSEN BLVD.
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK 73118
D
NONE
NONE
FOR THE NEXT
7 YEARS!
EVERY TIME YOU USE, CARRY,
BORROW OR BUY A FAKE ID:
• 	It's a felony
• 	You could spend 7 years in prison
• 	You could face a $10,000 fine
A FAKE ID CAN GET
YOU BEHIND BARS...

-- 67 of 72 --

68
CHAPTER 13
DRIVER’S RECORD
Some collisions, any Oklahoma court conviction for a traffic violation or any out-of-state court
conviction will be put on your driving record. Your entire driving record will be maintained by
Service Oklahoma and will be transferred if you apply for a license in another state.
Service Oklahoma will release your 3 year driving record to you under the provisions of the Driver
Privacy Protection Act upon completion of a records request form. To get a copy of a driving
record:
1. 	Complete a records request form, which may be obtained at a licensed operator or on
Service Oklahoma’s website or by writing to Service Oklahoma, Records Management, P.O.
Box 11415, Oklahoma City, OK 73136.
2. Records request form must be complete with your full name, date of birth and driver license
number.
3. There is a $25.00 fee for a copy of your driving record. (Effective July 1, 2010)
Service Oklahoma will provide the driving record to people over 65 at no charge.
COMPLIANCE DIVISION
If you drive carelessly, if you disobey the law, if you have a drug or alcohol abuse
problem that affects your driving or for any other reason you are not driving safely,
you may be required to appear for a Compliance Hearing.
The Compliance Division of Service Oklahoma was created to work with drivers
who will not or don’t know how to drive in a safe manner. The program is designed
to provide self-improvement and safer driving techniques to traffic violators and
people involved in collisions.
People with physical conditions that affect their driving may be required to
obtain the approval from the Compliance Division to get or retain a driver license.
Oklahoma law authorizes a Medical Advisory Committee, composed of medical
doctors, to recommend standards for the physical, emotional and mental capacity of
license applicants and licensed drivers.
A safety course may be required that will include activities such as meeting with
others for instruction or counseling, defensive driving techniques, identifying
collision traps, how to decrease the risk of a collision and the importance of a proper
attitude while driving.
When self-improvement does not occur or cannot be achieved, Service Oklahoma must suspend
or cancel driving privileges for the safety of the individual and all other drivers on Oklahoma’s
streets and highways.

-- 68 of 72 --

69
CHAPTER 13
PROBATIONARY LICENSE
A license issued to drivers under 18 is considered probationary: You are on a trial period to show
you can drive safely and legally. Service Oklahoma can, at its discretion, cancel or suspend your
license for any moving traffic violation.
MANDATORY REVOCATION OF YOUR LICENSE
State law requires that the driving privilege be revoked (withdrawn) for 6 months to 3 years for
a conviction of any of the following:
■ 	Manslaughter or negligent homicide resulting from operating a motor vehicle.
■ 	Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence
of intoxicants. (No additional suspension will be made if the driving privilege has
already been revoked under the Implied Consent Law for the same incident. See
Implied Consent Law on page 63.
■ 	Any felony in which a motor vehicle is used.
■ 	Failure to stop and render aid if you are a driver involved in a collision resulting in death or
personal injury (leaving the scene of a collision/hit-and-run).
■ 	Perjury or making a false statement under oath to obtain a license or for any other legal
matter relating to the ownership or operation of a motor vehicle.
■ 	Any drug conviction (misdemeanor or felony) while using a motor vehicle.
■ 	If under age 21, driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle with any
measurable quantity of alcohol.
OKLAHOMA MANDATORY POINT SYSTEM
The Mandatory Point System is a method by which Service Oklahoma monitors all driving
records. Everyone starts with a clean record—no points. Each time you are convicted of a
pointable traffic violation, you are assessed one or more points on your driving record. If you
accumulate 10 or more points within 5 years, your license will be suspended.
Points can be reduced as discussed below.
A driver convicted of these offenses, in any court, anywhere, having authority over these
violations, will be assessed as follows:
OFFENSE
Violation of license restriction ...............................................................................................................................................2
Reckless driving ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4
Careless driving ...............................................................................................................................................................................2
Speed......................................................................................................................................................................................................2
Speed in excess of 25 mph above posted limit .........................................................................................................3
Failure to stop or remain stopped for a school bus loading or unloading ............................................ 4
Following too close or improperly ......................................................................................................................................2
Failure to obey stop sign or traffic light .........................................................................................................................2
Failure to yield right of way .....................................................................................................................................................2
Left of center or wrong way on one way........................................................................................................................2
Operating a defective vehicle.................................................................................................................................................1
All other violations (excluding the violations requiring suspension or revocation action) ..........1

-- 69 of 72 --

70
CHAPTER 13
Point Reduction
Two (2) points are deducted for each 12-month period in which there are no convictions of any
pointable traffic violations. Points are reduced to zero if there are no traffic violation convictions
for three consecutive years.
Two (2) points are deducted for successful completion of a Service Oklahoma-approved Driver
Compliance or Defensive Driving Course. Credit for completing the course can be given once
every 24 months. The point total cannot go below zero.
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY—
LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 3 discusses the Liability Insurance Law. It’s so important that it will be repeated here:
Compulsory Liability Insurance—All Oklahoma drivers and/or vehicle owners are required by law
to carry the minimum limits of liability for this state:
■ 	$25,000 for injury or death of one person
■ 	$50,000 for injury or death of two or more persons
■ 	$25,000 for property damage
By law, you must show proof of insurance to a law enforcement officer or representative of
Service Oklahoma when asked. If you are in a collision, you must show your proof of insurance to
the other driver and to the other people involved.
IMPORTANT
Service Oklahoma
must have your current
address on file. Failure
to keep an updated
address with Service
Oklahoma could result
in a suspension without
your knowledge.
FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY—
PENALTY FOR NOT
HAVING INSURANCE
A fine of up to $250, 30 days in jail or
both, PLUS suspension of license and
registration upon conviction of failure to
comply with the Compulsory Insurance
Law or failure to produce proof of insur-
ance to a law enforcement officer upon
request.
TESTING LOCATIONS
Service Oklahoma maintains driver testing
facilities throughout the state. This is done to
better serve the public.
Visit our website for locations where driver
examinations are given. Personnel at these
sites can supply information concerning the
date and location of examinations within their
area.
WWW.SERVICE.OK.GOV

-- 70 of 72 --

71
Copyright 2023 Service Oklahoma, State of Oklahoma
All Rights Reserved – Service Oklahoma
The Service Oklahoma copyrights the contents of the Oklahoma Driver Manual. By downloading this file, I certify that this file is for my
personal use only and that I will print only one draft for my personal use and no other paper or digital copies will be made and that this
file will not be distributed to any person, organization or entity in any form, including paper copies and digital copies, without the express
written permission in advance from the State of Oklahoma, Service Oklahoma. This file may not be reproduced by any individual, agency,
organization, association or group without approval in writing from the Service Oklahoma.
For additional information, call 405.522.7000.

-- 71 of 72 --


-- 72 of 72 --