V E R M O N T
M A N U A L
2025
Phil Scott, Governor
State of Vermont
Joe Flynn, Secretary
Agency of Transportation
Andrew Collier, Commissioner
Department of Motor Vehicles
D R I V E R ’ S

-- 1 of 76 --

1
Organ Donation Saves Lives
When you apply for your license, you will have an
opportunity to become a registered donor.
Saying ‘Yes’ can save a life!
Fact: 	Saying “Yes” to donation will not affect your
medical care.
Fact: 	There is no cost to the donor or their family for
donation to take place.
Fact: 	All 	major 	religions 	support 	organ 	and 	tissue
donation or view it as an individual’s decision.
Fact: 	In the United States, it is illegal to buy or sell organs
and tissue for transplantation.
You Have the Power to Donate Life!
For more information visit DonateLifeVT.org

-- 2 of 76 --

2
Study for your Learner’s Permit test and learn to drive safely using our
web tutorial, DriveVermont. You can use
DriveVermont to learn the rules of the road and
how to drive safely while you study for your
Learner’s Permit test. You can also find out
what you need to know before you take your
written or road test.
You'll find DriveVermont packed with helpful
images and videos. Engaging quizzes will help
you test yourself on what you have learned. After completing the tutorial, you
can take a practice exam that will look very similar to the actual test you will be
taking.
To 	begin 	studying 	for 	your 	permit 	and 	learning 	to 	drive 	safely 	visit
dmv.vermont.gov
The Department of Motor Vehicles does not discriminate against individuals with
disabilities in the provision of services, programs, activities or employment.
The Department of Motor Vehicles will make reasonable accommodations available
when a person’s disability significantly interferes with their ability to understand
information presented for obtaining a Learner’s Permit or a Driver’s License.
If, for example, your disability limits your ability to read and understand written
language, you can the audio or online interactive versions of this manual which are
available on our website. If you feel that the Department of Motor Vehicles has not
provided you with a reasonable accommodation for your disability, you can file a
complaint with the Vermont Human Rights Commission by calling 800.416.2010.
If you have trouble reading or have a disability that inhibits your reading ability, let us
know when you make your appointment. We will work with you to accommodate your
needs.
The learner permit test is no longer taken in our office. It is an online test available on
our website, mydmv.vermont.gov.
VN-007 07/2024 MTC

-- 3 of 76 --

3
Safety Message from the Commissioner
Your decision to obtain a Learner’s Permit or a
Driver’s License carries with it, one of life’s greatest
social responsibilities. You are committing to:
maintaining a safe operating vehicle that meets
Vermont’s emissions standards, carrying liability
insurance, always obeying the rules of the road, and
adopting habits that eliminate driving distractions.
Vehicle 	collisions 	are 	the 	leading 	cause 	of
hospitalization and death from injuries. People of all
ages are affected, whether they are the driver,
passenger, or family member of a victim of one of
these crashes.
Having a license is a privilege; one that is earned by
demonstrating your driving skills in a manner that
shows you are a proficient and safe driver.
Retaining that privilege requires your continuing to operate your vehicle in a safe and
responsible manner.
We will try to make your driving test a positive experience even though we recognize the
anxiety associated with being tested.
Remember you share the highway with everyone else. AVOID DISTRACTIONS AND
DRIVE SAFELY.
Andrew Collier
Commissioner
This manual is produced by the Vermont Department of Motor Vehicles and printed in Vermont.
Please help reduce the cost to state government by returning this manual or passing it on to another
future driver.
THIS MANUAL MAY NOT BE USED DURING THE TEST

-- 4 of 76 --

4
Contents
Chapter 1 - General Information ..................................................................... 5
Chapter 2 - How to Lose Your License .......................................................... 7
Chapter 3 – Proof of Identity .......................................................................... 8
Chapter 4 – General License Information ..................................................... 12
Questions and Answers About Learner’s Permits................................ 12
Questions and Answers About Junior Driver’s Licenses ..................... 13
Questions and Answers About Driver’s Licenses ................................ 16
Chapter 5 - Graduated Driver’s License Program ........................................ 20
Chapter 6 – Fees, Renewals & Replacements............................................... 23
Chapter 7 - Driving Safely and Studying for Your Permit ........................... 25
How to Drive Safely............................................................................. 25
Parking Your Vehicle ........................................................................... 29
Roundabouts......................................................................................... 29
Police Stops .......................................................................................... 30
Move Over Law ................................................................................... 31
Traffic Lights, Road Signs, and Highway Markings ........................... 31
Road Signs ........................................................................................... 32
Sharing the Road .................................................................................. 37
Hazardous Driving Conditions ............................................................. 46
Interstate Driving ................................................................................. 50
Impaired Driving .................................................................................. 52
Distracted Driving ................................................................................ 54
The Road (Skills) Test ......................................................................... 56
Chapter 8 - Point System .............................................................................. 64
Chapter 9 – Vehicle Ownership .................................................................... 65
Chapter 10 – Commercial Driver’s License ................................................. 70
Chapter 11 - Persons with Disabilities .......................................................... 71
Chapter 12 – Parents or Guardians ............................................................... 73

-- 5 of 76 --

5
Chapter 1 - General Information
VERMONT STATE HOLIDAYS
New Year's Day 	January 1 st
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day 	3 rd Monday in January
Presidents’ Day 	3 rd Monday in February
Town Meeting Day 	1 st Tuesday in March
Memorial Day 	Last Monday in May
Independence Day 	July 4 th
Bennington Battle Day 	August 16 th
Labor Day 	1 st Monday in September
Veterans' Day 	November 11 th
Thanksgiving Day 	4 th Thursday in November
Day After Thanksgiving 	Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day 	December 25 th
All offices are closed on the above dates, and on the observed dates as outlined below.
A holiday which falls on a Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday. A holiday
which falls on a Sunday shall be observed on the following Monday.
An examiner may not always be present due to road testing. Please be patient. An
examiner will assist you as soon as possible.
On occasion it may be necessary to cancel or postpone driver testing due to poor road
conditions. Call 802.828.2000 or visit mydmv.vermont.gov to reschedule, if necessary.
Prepared by:
Department of Motor Vehicles
120 State Street
Montpelier, Vermont 05603-0001
dmv.vermont.gov

-- 6 of 76 --

6
OFFICE LOCATIONS
Bennington
Bennington County
530 Main St
Dummerston
Windham County
AOT District #2 Office,
Route 5
Montpelier
Washington County - Main Office
120 State Street
Newport
Orleans County
100 Main Street
Saint Albans
Franklin County
27 Fisher Pond Rd
Saint Johnsbury
Caledonia County
Green Mtn Mall,
1998 Memorial Dr
South Burlington
Chittenden County
4 Market Street
Springfield
Windsor County
100 Mineral St, Suite 103
Rutland
Rutland County
101 State Place
White River Junction
Windsor County
221 Beswick Drive
All office visits are by appointment only.
To schedule an appointment, visit
mydmv.vermont.gov or call 888.970.0357
Contact
dmv.vermont.gov/contact
facebook.com/VermontDMV
802.828.2000
888 99-VERMONT (888-998-3766)
Hearing Impaired Dial 711

-- 7 of 76 --

7
Chapter 2 - How to Lose Your License
How Can You Lose Your License Or Driving Privilege?
7 V.S.A. § 656 - Minors misrepresenting age, procuring, possessing, or consuming
liquors; first offense; civil violation
If caught and ticketed, you will be required to contact the Teen Alcohol Safety
Program (TASP) of Vermont Court Diversion (failure to contact the diversion board
within 15 days will result in the case being referred to the judicial bureau, where the
person, if found liable for the violation, will be subject to a penalty of $300.00 and a 90-
day suspension of the person's Driver’s License, and may face substantially increased
insurance 	rates) 	and 	participate 	in 	an 	alcohol 	abuse 	evaluation, 	follow 	the
recommendations of the counselor and other requirements. All of these programs require
additional fees. In addition if you fail to complete TASP or other Diversion requirements,
your license or privilege to drive will be SUSPENDED. Additional fees will be due to
DMV in order to be reinstated.
23 V.S.A. § 202 - Impersonating Another In An Application, Or Aiding An
Applicant By False Representation
A person who falsely impersonates another in an application for Driver’s License or
Learner’s Permit, or in an application for a non-driver identification card, or in an
application for motor vehicle registration, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or motorboat
registration, or vessel validation, or who obtains a license to operate a motor vehicle by
false representation, or who obtains a Learner’s Permit or non-driver identification card
by false representation, or who obtains a motor vehicle registration or a registration for
any other type of vehicle or vessel by false representation, or who uses an assumed name
or name not his or her own in an application for Driver’s License, or Learner’s Permit or
in an application for non-driver identification card, or in an application for motor vehicle
registration, or registration for any other type vehicle or vessel, or who knowingly aids
an applicant in obtaining such license, permit, registration or non-driver identification
card by false representation as to the age or identity of such applicant, shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than two years, or both and shall have his or
her privilege to operate suspended for 90 days.
PROBLEM DRIVER POINTER SYSTEM
Upon application for a Learner’s Permit, Junior Driver’s License or Driver’s License,
an inquiry will be made of the national Problem Driver Pointer System (PDPS). If the
results of the PDPS inquiry indicate you are suspended, revoked, denied, or canceled in
another state, you will be denied the issuance of a Vermont Driver's License, Learner’s
Permit or Junior Driver’s License until such time as we receive proof you have been
reinstated or cleared in that state. If you have been suspended, revoked, denied, or
cancelled in another state, you may not be tested or obtain a Driver’s License.

-- 8 of 76 --

8
Chapter 3 – Proof of Identity
You will need documentation from each of the 4 categories below:
1. 	Identity and Date of Birth
2. 	Social Security Information
3. 	Vermont Residency and Current Address
4. 	Lawful Status in the United States (Only required for Real ID & EDL)
Note:
 Documents must be original, or copies certified by the issuing agency. Faxed or
photocopied documents will NOT be accepted.
 Documents are subject to departmental review and approval. Additional information
may be required.
 In some cases, document approval may not occur in the same day and may require an
additional visit.
 Original documents provided to DMV will be returned to the applicant and may be
imaged and stored in a secure database.
 If your name is different than what’s indicated on your documents, you must provide
proof of legal change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, court order, etc.)
Identity and date of birth:
Must provide one of the following:
 Valid, unexpired passport
 A certified record of the applicant's birth, marriage, adoption, or divorce, including a
translation if necessary
 Consular Report of Birth Abroad (CRBA) issued by the U.S. Department of State
(Form FS-240, DS-1350 or FS-545)
 Valid consular identification document issued by the government of Mexico,
Guatemala (or any other government with comparable security standards and
protocols, as determined by the Commissioner)
 Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551)
 Certificate of Naturalization issued by DHS (Form N-550 or Form N-570)
 Certificate of Citizenship (Form N-560 or Form N-561) issued by DHS
 Real ID Driver’s License or Identification Card issued in compliance with the
standards established by 6 CFR part 37
 If the name on the license is/will be other than the name that appears on a primary
source document (for example, through marriage, adoption, court order, or other
mechanism permitted by State law or regulation), evidence of the name change
through the presentation of documents issued by a court, governmental body or other
entity as determined by the Commissioner is required. DMV will maintain copies of
the documentation presented and maintain a record of both the recorded name and the
name on the primary source documents.
Note: Additional documentation may be required at the DMV's discretion if the
documentation submitted is questionable or if there is reason to believe the person is not
who they claims to be. The driver's license personnel will determine if the documents

-- 9 of 76 --

9
provided from this list are authentic, valid, and acceptable. Photocopies and faxes of
documents will NOT be accepted.
Enhanced Driver’s License (EDL) requires Proof of US Citizenship:
U.S. citizens returning from Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, or Bermuda, by land or
sea, are required to present a U.S. Passport, U.S. Passport Card or an Enhanced Driver's
License (EDL). An EDL requires proof of US Citizenship in addition to proof of Identity,
SSN and Vermont Residency.
Social Security Information
You must present your Social Security card or a letter from the Social Security
Administration indicating ineligibility to receive a Social Security number (SSN).
If your Social Security card is not available, one of the following forms may be used
in its place:
 W-2 form,
 SSA-1099 form,
 pay stub showing name and SSN (minimum of last 4 digits)
Corrected Information / Name Change
Your name must verify with Social Security Administration. If you need to correct or
update information at the Social Security Administration, do so before you visit DMV.
You must bring your updated Social Security card with you when applying for a
corrected Driver's License or ID card in your new name. For information on how to do
this, visit socialsecurity.gov.
Replacement Social Security Card
The Social Security Administration offers online services for residents of Vermont
available through the Social Security online portal. This allows people to replace their
SSN card from the comfort of their home or office, without the need to travel to a Social
Security office. For information on how to do this, visit socialsecurity.gov.
Foreign Nationals
If you are a temporary foreign national not authorized for employment, you are
required to present documentation from Social Security Administration verifying you do
not have an SSN. Vermont DMV will verify your USCIS number. The Vermont DMV
will not issue a Driver's License or ID if you have less than 30 days of Lawful Presence
remaining. The Vermont DMV will electronically verify your name, date of birth and,
SSN with the Social Security Administration. Make sure your document is up to date and
accurate to avoid delay.

-- 10 of 76 --

10
Vermont Residency & Current Address
To obtain a new Vermont Driver's License, Enhanced Driver's License, Learner's
Permit, Non-Driver ID, or Commercial Driver's License applicants must provide proof
of residency in Vermont. In addition, applicants with an out-of-state physical address will
be required to prove Vermont residency upon renewal of any of the above documents.
The residential address you supply must be a street or highway address. It may not
be a post office box. In areas where a number and street name have not been assigned, an
address convention used by the U.S. Postal Service is acceptable. You may use a post
office box as your mailing address.
If mail is received at the street address:
 	Two pieces of mail with current name and street address.
If mail is not received at the street address, provide any two (2) of the following which
show street address:
 	Utility bill (must list service address).
 	Property tax bill with physical location.
 	Lease or Landlord statement.
 	Vermont EBT (Electronic Benefit Transfer) card or Vermont AIM (Advanced
Information Management) identification card.
 	Homeowners/Renters insurance (policy/proof of claim).
 	If the applicant resides with others and gets no mail at their street address:
 	Completed Vermont Residency Certification and submit with application.
U.S. Military, Active Duty
 	If residing in Vermont, see above.
 	If residing out-of-state, military ID and proof Vermont is their residence in
military records, such as Leave and Earnings Statement or orders.
Minors
 	Vermont Residency Certification and one (1) parent residency document from
above.
 	Parent/Guardian evidence of relationship to applicant.
Residency Requirements for a Vermont Learner’s Permit
To prove Vermont residency, the applicant must provide the Department with one of
the documents indicated above. If the applicant is a minor, the parent/guardian will be
required to provide one of the residency documents.
If the applicant is not a Vermont resident, he/she may only obtain a Vermont
Learner’s Permit for the purpose of participating in a driver education and training
course. The applicant must provide the Department with one of the following:
 	A letter from a school Guidance Counselor stating the student/applicant is to be
enrolled in a driver education course, or

-- 11 of 76 --

11
 	A letter from a Driver Education School indicating the applicant/student is
enrolled in a class.
Lawful Status in the United States (Required for Real ID & EDL
only)
In most cases, the documents required for proof of identity and date of birth will also
establish lawful status in the United States. Foreign nationals must provide a passport
and visa, alien registration receipt card (green card), or other proof of legal presence for
inspection and copying.
The Vermont DMV uses a U.S. Department of Homeland Security program known
as Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) to electronically verify
immigration documents issued by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security or U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services.
 	If applying for an Enhanced License (EDL) Proof of US Citizenship is required.
 	Proof of Lawful Status must have a minimum of 30 days remaining.
Driver’s Privilege Card
A Driver Privilege Card is a Vermont license or permit that is NOT Real ID
compliant.
The Driver Privilege Card is available to anyone that is a Vermont Resident. Issuance
of the DPC does not require proof of legal presence or US citizenship.
Self-Designated Descriptors
The following are self-designated descriptors for a Vermont Driver’s License or Non-
Driver Identification card.
 	Height
 	Weight
 	Eye color
 	Gender
Applicants are not required under Vermont or federal law to present documentation
that confirms the information they submit for these entries.

-- 12 of 76 --

12
Chapter 4 – General License Information
Licenses
If you live in Vermont and plan to drive in Vermont, you must obtain a Vermont
driver's license. A person who has moved into the state from another jurisdiction with a
valid license from that state shall obtain a Vermont license within 60 days of moving into
the state.
In accordance with state and federal law, any person holding a commercial driver’s
license from another state must transfer their commercial driver’s license within 30 days
of establishing residency in Vermont.
The act of licensing makes driving a privilege, and holding a license requires that you
drive within the limits of the law and treat all users of the highway, including bicyclists,
motorcyclists, and pedestrians with courtesy and consideration.
Your influence on the lives of others is greatly expanded, as is your responsibility
when you get into the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle. The license examination tests your
knowledge and skills. It is your responsibility to drive safely and responsibly.
Types of Licenses
 	Learner’s Permit
 	Driver’s License
 	Junior Driver’s License
 	Commercial Driver’s License (CDL)
 	Enhanced Driver's License (EDL)
 	Driver’s Privilege Card
Questions and Answers about Learner’s Permits
Who needs a Learner’s Permit?
If you are a Vermont resident and want to drive in Vermont, you will have to get a
Vermont Learner’s Permit. You must be at least 15 years old to take the test. A resident
of another State enrolled in a Vermont Driver Education & Training course can also
obtain a Vermont Learner's Permit (A letter from the school confirming enrollment will
be required).
What do I need to do to get a Learner’s Permit?
1. If you are 15, 16 or 17 years old, you need your parent's or legal guardian's permission
(unless you are an emancipated minor). A parent or legal guardian must sign the
application before you can take the test. If you are a foreign exchange student, you
may obtain a Foreign Exchange Parental Authorization Form (VL-036) to be signed
by a parent or legal guardian. A host parent cannot sign.
2. Your permit will be issued after you pass the online permit test and pay the required
fees.
To apply for a Learner’s Permit, an individual under the age of 18 must have
maintained a ‘clean’ driving record in the previous two (2) years. If you have had any
recalls, suspensions, or revocations, contact DMV as you may be required to serve an
additional waiting period.

-- 13 of 76 --

13
When and Where can I drive with a Permit?
With a valid Learner’s Permit, you may drive anywhere, anytime in Vermont if there
is a licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired
driver education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age or
older riding in the front seat. Before driving in any other state, you must contact that
state’s Motor Vehicle Department or law enforcement agency to see if it is legal to drive
in that state with a Vermont Learner’s Permit.
Questions and Answers about Junior Driver’s Licenses
Who can get a Junior Driver’s License?
An individual must have maintained a ‘clean’ driving record without any Learner’s
Permit recalls, suspensions, or revocations for a six (6) month period prior to obtaining a
Junior Driver’s License.
An individual must possess a Learner’s Permit for at least one (1) year prior to
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License.
A Junior Driver’s License is issued to persons 16 or 17 years old who pass the
required examination. Your parent or legal guardian must sign your application giving
permission for you to be tested.
Before getting a license, all 16- and 17-year old’s must have passed a state approved
driver education and training course consisting of 30 hours of classroom study, 6 hours
behind the wheel training and 6 hours of observation. The Vermont Agency of Education,
Driver Education Division, oversees driver education courses at high schools. There are
also Vermont commercial driver training schools that offer driver training courses. In
addition to the hours indicated above, you must complete 40 hours of driving practice,
with at least 10 hours being nighttime driving. Nighttime driving is considered driving
during the period of 30 minutes after sunset, to 30 minutes before sunrise.
What Do I need to get a Junior Driver’s License?
1. A Vermont Learner’s Permit that is not expired. A person may take a road test if their
Learner’s Permit has not been expired more than 3 years and has been renewed prior
to the exam. If it has been expired more than 3 years a written exam would be required
before the road test can be given.
2. Successful completion of a driver education course certified by the Vermont Agency
of Education or the Vermont Department of Motor Vehicles. Your instructor must
have logged your completion in the Driver Education Certification Service before a
Driving Test can be administered. Out-of-state driver’s education is only acceptable
if the course was taught by a certified and/or licensed driver education instructor and
includes both classroom and behind-the-wheel training. If the completion certificate
was not issued by a state agency, the applicant must provide documentation on state
letterhead from the appropriate agency indicating that a recognized driver education
program issued the certificate, and must list the minimum requirements for successful
completion of the program.

-- 14 of 76 --

14
3. Your parent or guardian must certify you have completed 40 hours of practice behind
the wheel, with at least 10 hours being nighttime driving. You can use the Driving
Practice Log Sheet (form VN-219) or the RoadReady App to track your
progress. Note: The law requires the 40 hours of driving practice to be in addition to
the 6 hours of behind-the-wheel driving required for successful completion of driver
education.
4. You need your parent's or legal guardian's permission (unless you are an emancipated
minor). A parent or legal guardian must sign the application before you can take the
test. If you are a foreign exchange student, you must obtain in advance a Foreign
Exchange Parental Authorization (form VL-036) to be signed by a parent or legal
guardian. Your host parent cannot sign this form. This form is available at Motor
Vehicles offices.
5. You must enter your Social Security Number on the application or provide a letter
from the Social Security Administration indicating your ineligibility to receive a
Social Security Number.
6. Schedule an appointment for an exam.
7. Have a vehicle that is clean, in good mechanical condition, legal, and with a valid
inspection sticker. Be sure the emergency/parking brake is working properly.
8. Be prepared: Check for a valid insurance card as required by Vermont Law and
vehicle registration before arriving for your appointment. Failure to show a valid
insurance card and a registration certificate will prevent testing. The insurance card
must state the name of the insurance carrier, effective and expiration dates of
coverage, the name of the insured, and the description of the vehicle including the
vehicle identification number.
9. Your license will be issued after you pass the road test, pay the required fees and
provide proper identification (see Chapter 3).
Transferring an Out-of-State Junior Driver’s License (applicants under 18)
You may convert your out-of-state Junior Driver’s License and obtain a Vermont
Junior Driver’s License by: (1) successfully passing the required examinations; (2)
providing proof (see What Do I Need to Get a Junior Driver’s License, #2 above) of
successful completion of a state approved Driver Education program; (3) providing proof
of completion of an additional 40 hours of driving.
If you have a Junior Driver’s License from another state and apply for a Vermont
Junior Driver’s License you will be subject to Vermont's Graduated License provisions
unless you have held the Junior Driver’s License in the other state for a period of at least
six months.
High School Driver’s License Testing
Some DMV licensed high school driver education instructors conduct Driver’s
License road tests. This service is provided only at schools that have enrolled in the
testing program, and by those instructors who have been certified as examiners by the

-- 15 of 76 --

15
Department of Motor Vehicles. Road tests will be administered only to students who
attend a participating school.
A student who passed the road test which was given by the high school driver
education instructor will be issued a Driver Education Examination Certificate. This
certificate, valid Vermont Learner’s Permit, license application completed and signed by
parent or legal guardian, road test and licensing fee, and proof of Vermont residency are
all required for license issue. These must be submitted in person to any Motor Vehicle
Customer Service Office. The instructors at participating schools will provide complete
information regarding this program to students.
What restrictions are on a Junior Driver’s License?
A Junior Driver’s License is considered a provisional license. The Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles may take your license away if you show that you are an unsafe driver
through your actions. Your license may also be taken away if your parent or guardian
withdraws their permission for you to drive.
While holding a Junior Driver’s License, you cannot operate a vehicle in the course
of your employment for one (1) year following the issuance of the Junior Driver’s
License. For example, an individual cannot act as a pizza delivery person (driver) until
they have had their Junior Driver’s License for one (1) year, or until they reach the age
of eighteen (18), whichever comes first.
While holding a Junior Driver’s License, an individual may not carry passengers for
hire.
During the first three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the
individual is restricted to driving alone. Passengers are permitted only if there is a
licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired driver
education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age or older
riding in the front seat. If one (1) of those individuals is in the vehicle, there is no
restriction on the number of passengers. However, the driver is not allowed to transport
more passengers than there are safety belts.
During the second three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the
individual may begin transporting family members.
After holding a Junior Driver’s License for six (6) months, there is no restriction on
the number of passengers they can transport in the vehicle. However the driver is not
allowed to transport more passengers than there are safety belts.
A person shall not use any portable electronic device while operating a motor vehicle.
This 	includes 	reading, 	and 	the 	manual 	composing 	or 	sending 	of 	electronic
communications (including text messages, instant messages, and emails). Portable
electronic devices include, but are not limited to, cellular telephones, personal digital
assistant (PDA), tablets/iPads and laptop computers.

-- 16 of 76 --

16
Questions and Answers about Driver’s Licenses
Who can get a Driver’s License?
A Driver’s License is issued to eligible individuals 18 years of age or older who pass
the required examination. This license allows a person to drive any noncommercial
vehicle except a school bus or motorcycle. To drive a school bus or ride a motorcycle
additional exams are required.
How do I get A Driver’s License if I have a valid Learner’s Permit?
1. Make an appointment for an exam.
2. Have a licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified
unimpaired driver education instructor, or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25
years of age or older with you. The license of any accompanying driver must be valid
at the time of application.
3. Have a vehicle that is clean and in good mechanical condition with a valid inspection
sticker. Be sure the emergency/parking brake is working properly.
4. Proof of current and valid automobile insurance is required by Vermont law. The
proof must state the name of the insurance carrier, effective and expiration dates of
coverage, name of insured, description of the vehicle including the vehicle
identification number.
5. Proof of valid registration for the vehicle is required.
6. Your license will be issued after you pass the road test and pay the fees.
How do I get A Driver’s License if I have a valid license from another state?
When a new Vermont Resident applies for a Vermont Driver’s License and
possesses a valid out-of-state license or an out-of-state license that has been expired for
three (3) year or less, an eye examination will be required.
1. 	Bring your valid or expired (3 years or less) license from your home state, proof of
identity (see chapter 3). If your home state license is not valid, have someone who
has a valid license drive you to the Department of Motor Vehicles. If your license
has been expired for more than three (3) years, or you do not have an out-of-state
license, you will have to take the vision, written and road tests.
Who May Not Be Issued a New License or Renew an Existing License?
A person whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any state has been suspended,
revoked, or refused cannot be issued a license until such suspension, revocation or refusal
has been terminated and the person has been officially notified in writing of
reinstatement.
A license cannot be issued to a person when the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles has
evidence that such person either cannot or will not operate a motor vehicle without
endangering the other users of the highway.
A person who is not a Vermont Resident.

-- 17 of 76 --

17
SCHOOL BUS ENDORSEMENT
Every Vermont licensed driver, who transports school children in a school bus, must
have a driver's license with a school bus endorsement.
 	If you drive a school bus, which has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds
or more, or which is manufactured to carry 16 or more passengers including the
driver, you will need a Commercial Driver’s License with passenger and school bus
endorsements.
 	If you transport school children in school buses rated by the manufacturer for fewer
than 16 passengers, you are required to obtain a Type II school bus endorsement on
your driver’s license.
 	If you are transporting school children in other vehicles, you may also need a Type II
school bus endorsement.
 	If you transport school children in a multifunction school activity bus, owned or
leased by a school, you need a school bus endorsement.
 	If you are transporting school children for hire, such as in a taxi, you must have a
school bus endorsement.
 	If you are transporting school children in cars or vans owned either privately or by a
school, you may be required to get a school bus endorsement on your driver’s license.
You can get a school bus manual by visiting one of our offices.
MOTORCYCLE ENDORSEMENT & MOTORCYCLE LEARNER’S PERMITS
Any person 16 years old or older who has a license may get a motorcycle endorsement
or a motorcycle permit by passing a test.
You should read the Motorcycle Licensing Guide and Operator’s Manual before
taking the test. You can get a motorcycle manual by visiting one of our offices.
MOTORCYCLE RIDER TRAINING PROGRAM
The Vermont Rider Education Program (VREP) encourages people of all ages who
are interested in riding a motorcycle to take this training. The training program follows
nationally recognized safety and training standards and involves both classroom and on-
motorcycle training. Motorcycles, textbooks, and helmets are provided for students
taking the Basic Rider Course. Students who successfully complete the Course are
exempt from taking the state written and skill exams required to obtain a motorcycle
endorsement. For course information visit the Vermont DMV website.
Do I need an Appointment?
Yes, visit mydmv.vermont.gov to schedule an appointment. All DMV visits are by
appointment only. If you are unable to keep the scheduled appointment, please cancel or
reschedule your appointment as soon as possible so that we may make the scheduled time
available to someone else. Check your proof of valid insurance as required by Vermont
Law and vehicle registration before arriving at DMV.

-- 18 of 76 --

18
Note: If you are hearing impaired an interpreter will be provided if requested at the
time of scheduling an appointment. Vermont Relay Service (TTY) is available by calling
711.
Why Does the State Require Driving Tests?
The tests are used to evaluate the following:
 	Can you read and understand the road signs and lights used on the road?
 	Do you know the laws about driving vehicles in this state?
 	Can you see well enough to drive safely?
 	Do you have the proper driving skills to enable you to be a safe and courteous
driver?
 	Do you have any disabilities that may affect your ability to operate your vehicle
safely?
 	Will you properly maintain your vehicle so that it will be safe to drive?
 	Are you willing and do you have the knowledge necessary, to be a safe and
courteous driver?
 	Are you committed to respecting the rights of bicyclists, motorcyclists, and
pedestrians as well as other drivers?
What are the Tests Like?
1. 	Vision Test
Using a vision-screening device, the examiner will test how well you see. If the
results of the screening determine that your vision does not meet the required
standards of 20/40, you will be referred to an eye doctor of your choice and expense
for further testing. The eye doctor will complete an evaluation to determine if any
restrictions should be placed on your driving privilege. The eye doctor must be a
licensed optometrist or ophthalmologist.
2. 	Knowledge test
The knowledge test is online and has 20 questions. Each question has four
answers to choose from, of which only one is correct. You must answer at least 16
questions correctly to pass the test. If you fail the test, you must wait at least one day
before taking another one.
3. 	Road Test
The road test will not be given until you have passed all other parts of the test.
Before the examination, you should have at least 40 hours of actual driving
experience under the direction of an experienced driver or driving instructor. At least
five hours of this should be in traffic. Practically every person of average ability with
sufficient practice, under the supervision of a good instructor, can learn to drive.

-- 19 of 76 --

19
During the road test, you will not be asked to do anything which is against the
law. No tricks will be played on you. You must follow the directions of the examiner
who will be riding with you. You will be expected to handle your vehicle with skill,
drive at proper speeds according to conditions, and obey signs and rules of the road.
No animals are allowed in the vehicle during a road test.
If you fail the road test for any reason, you must wait at least one week before
taking another test. If you fail a road test three times, a minimum waiting period of
one month is required.
Do I Have to Furnish a Vehicle for the Driving Test?
Yes. The vehicle must be registered and inspected. The state in which it is registered
and inspected does not matter. You must have proof of insurance for the vehicle you use.
Check your registration, inspection sticker and insurance before arriving for the test.
Rental vehicles may not be used for road tests unless the rental company provides a
letter accepting full responsibility if the applicant takes the road test in the rental vehicle.
Vehicles that are displaying dealer registration are not acceptable unless you are an
immediate family member of the dealership. No road test will be given in a vehicle
displaying agriculture, antique or exhibit plates because these plates, by law, are
restricted in their use.
Condition of the Vehicle Used in the Road Test
You will not be permitted to take the driving test unless the motor vehicle you furnish
is properly equipped, in good mechanical condition, and properly registered, insured, and
inspected. The safe operating condition of the vehicle is the responsibility of the operator.
Proper equipment in good mechanical condition includes: headlights, horn, windshield
wipers, rearview mirror, tail lights, tires, steering mechanism, windshield, exhaust
system, brakes, fenders, bumpers and if manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1955,
directional signals. Safety belts and defrosters are required in 1964 and later models. No
road test will be given in a vehicle that does not have safety belts. Emergency/parking
brakes must be adequate to hold the vehicle in neutral on any grade on which it is
operated, both with the vehicle headed uphill or downhill. Illegal tinting of the front
windows of your vehicle is not allowed.

-- 20 of 76 --

20
Chapter 5 - Graduated Driver’s License Program
Graduated Driver’s License Program
Individuals who obtain a Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License are subject to
our Graduated Driver’s License law. The key provisions of this law are indicated below:
1. 	An individual fifteen (15) years of age or older may operate a motor vehicle if they
hold a valid Learner’s Permit and are accompanied by one (1) of the following
people in the vehicle, who is riding beside the driver:
 	A licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian,
 	A licensed or certified and unimpaired driver education instructor, and/or
 	A licensed and unimpaired person at least twenty-five (25) years of age.
2. 	To apply for a Learner’s Permit, an individual must have maintained a clean driving
record in the previous two (2) years
3. 	An individual must possess a Learner’s Permit for at least one (1) year prior to
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License.
4. 	Prior to obtaining a Junior Driver’s License, an individual must complete an
additional forty (40) hours of practice behind the wheel, with at least ten (10) hours
being nighttime driving, while accompanied by one of the individuals indicated
above who is riding beside the driver. The forty (40) hours of practice is in addition
to the six hours of behind the wheel instruction time required for successful
completion of a driver-training course. This additional practice must be certified by
one of the individuals indicated above. NOTE: ‘Nighttime driving’ is defined as
driving during the period of thirty (30) minutes after sunset, to thirty (30) minutes
before sunrise.
5. 	An individual must have maintained a ‘clean’ driving record without any Learner’s
Permit recalls, suspensions, or revocations for a six (6) month period prior to
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License.
6. 	While holding a Junior Driver’s License, the individual may not operate a vehicle in
the course of their employment for one (1) year following the issuance of the Junior
Driver’s License. For example, an individual cannot act as a pizza delivery driver
until having had a Junior Driver’s License for one (1) year, or until reaching the age
of eighteen (18), whichever comes first.
7. 	While holding a Junior Driver’s License, an individual may not carry passengers for
hire.
8. 	During the first three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the
individual is restricted to driving alone. Passengers are permitted only if there is a
licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired
driver education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age
or older riding in the front seat. If one (1) of those individuals is in the vehicle, there

-- 21 of 76 --

21
are no restrictions on the number of passengers. However, the driver is not allowed
to transport more passengers than there are safety belts.
9. 	During the second three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the
individual may begin transporting immediate family members; siblings and parents
only.
10. After holding a Junior Driver’s License for six (6) months, there is no restriction on
the number of passengers they can transport in the vehicle. However, the driver is
not allowed to transport more passengers than there are safety belts.
11. An individual who holds a Vermont Junior Driver’s License must be eighteen (18)
years of age and must not have any recalls, suspensions, or revocations during the
previous six (6) month period, to be eligible to obtain a Driver’s License. This six
(6) month period commences on the date of their reinstatement.
12. When an individual who has a Junior Driver’s License from another state applies for
a Vermont Junior Driver’s License, he or she will be required to provide proof they
have successfully completed a state approved driver education course which meets
or exceeds Vermont requirements. They will also be required to pass an eye, written
and road test. They will also be subject to the Graduated License Law unless they
have held the other state's license for a period of at least six months.
13. A Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License is considered to be a ‘provisional
license’, which is recallable. Any of the following actions will result in the recall of
an individual’s Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License (for more detail, see 23
VSA § 607a, § 614a):
 	Carrying Passengers for Hire, Junior Operator Violation (CPH) = 90-day recall
 	Driving For Employer/Employment, Junior Operator Violation (DFE) = 90-day
recall
 	Recommendation From a Diversion/Reparative Board Recall (DRB) = 30-day
recall
 	Junior Operator Points Accumulation Recall (JRP) = 90 day recall (for a single
3 pt. Speeding violation or a 6 pt. Total)
 	Junior Operator texting (JRT) = 30 day recall (includes fines of at least $100 and
at least two points on your driving record)
 	While a recall is in effect, an individual is ineligible for a Junior Driver’s
License or a Driver’s License.
 	When a recall is issued, the individual has the right to a hearing.
 	When a Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License is recalled, it shall be
restored upon the expiration of a specific term, and, if required, when the
individual has passed a re-examination.
 	No reinstatement fee shall be due when a Learner’s Permit/Junior Driver’s
License recall is restored.

-- 22 of 76 --

22
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death
and injury for teenagers. As a parent or guardian, you
have a critical role in influencing your child’s safe
driving habits.
The law requires teens 15 to 18 years old learn to drive
in stages. Restrictions on young drivers are based on
scientific findings and some of the major factors that
place teens at risk: age, lack of driving experience,
passengers and other distractions. The GDL exists to
save teen lives and reduce injuries.
However, 	the 	GDL 	alone 	cannot 	prevent 	all 	teen
crashes.
More US teens are killed texting while driving than
drinking.
Must See Texting while Driving PSA from
Tredegar Comprehensive School and
Gwent Police (Gwent is in south-east
Wales, UK)

-- 23 of 76 --

23
Chapter 6 – Fees, Renewals & Replacements
Fees:
Fees you must pay to get a Learner’s Permit
 	Exam and Learner’s Permit fee = $63.00 (knowledge test $39.00 + permit $24.00)
Fees you must pay to get a Junior Driver’s License if you have a valid Learner’s Permit
 	Road Test Exam and Junior Driver’s License = $62.00 (road test $23.00 + license
$39.00)
Fees you must pay to get a Driver’s License if you have a valid Learner’s Permit
 	Road test and 4-year license = $85.00 (road test $23.00 + license $62.00)
 	Road test and 2-year license = $62.00 (road test $23.00 + license $39.00)
Fees you must pay to get a Driver’s License if you have a valid Driver’s License from
another State
 	4-year license fee = $62.00
 	2-year license fee = $39.00
 	+ $4.00 per year if a motorcycle endorsement is being carried over.
Renewal fees
 	4-year license = $62.00 (with motorcycle endorsement = $78.00)
 	2-year license = $39.00 (with motorcycle endorsement = $47.00)
 	Learner’s Permit - $24.00
Replacement of lost or corrected Learner’s Permit or License (name or address change)
 	$24.00
Enhanced Driver’s License (EDL)
 	$36.00 (in addition to any other fees) – visit dmv.vermont.gov for additional details
on Enhanced Driver’s Licenses
Fees are accurate as of July 1, 2024. All fees are
subject to change.
Visit the DMV website at dmv.vermont.gov to verify fees.

-- 24 of 76 --

24
Permit/License Renewals
 	About a month before your license or permit expires, a renewal application will be
mailed to your address as listed in our files. Answer all the questions on the form,
sign it and return the renewal form and fees to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
The department will then mail to you an updated license or permit. If you do not
receive a renewal form in the mail, you can obtain a renewal application at a
Department of Motor Vehicles office, or online at dmv.vermont.gov. Fill out the form
and mail it with the correct fees to the Department of Motor Vehicles, 120 State
Street, Montpelier, VT 05603-0001, or visit one of our offices. A license photo is
valid for 8 years. Your photo will be updated any time you renew in person.
 	A Vermont license that has expired for more than 14 days is not a valid license. You
may not drive with it.
 	If your Vermont driver's license is expired more than three (3) years, you must be
tested again to obtain a new license.
You can renew your license online at mydmv.vermont.gov.
How do I replace my Lost License or Learner’s Permit?
If you lose your license, you may obtain a replacement from the Department of Motor
Vehicles.
You can replace your license online at mydmv.vermont.gov.
I Have Changed My Name or Address. What Do I Do?
If you have changed your name or address, you must report the change to the
Department of Motor Vehicles within 30 days.
You can update your address online at mydmv.vermont.gov (name changes require
an in person visit.

-- 25 of 76 --

25
Chapter 7 - Driving Safely and Studying for your Permit
The information in this section will help you learn to drive safely and will help prepare
you for the Learner’s Permit test.
REMEMBER: Be sure to read the rest of the driver manual before taking your written
test. Even if you pass your test, your permit will not be issued unless all other
requirements have been met and all required documents have been provided.
HOW TO DRIVE SAFELY
Motor vehicle crashes are most often caused by actions or errors of the driver.
However, any motorist can drive safely by using care, courtesy, and caution, and by
modeling the proper behaviors.
Where Should I Start Driving?
A person with a Learner’s Permit should first practice driving in an empty parking lot
or on roads that do not have much traffic. It is important to develop basic car control
before driving in areas that are busy. As your skills improve, you may drive on roads
where there is more traffic.
Because you may be driving more slowly than most other drivers, you may be
creating a hazard. If traffic is backing up behind you, you are required by law to pull
over to the side of the road, when it is safe to do so, and allow following vehicles to go
by. This makes driving safer for them, and for you—you will be more relaxed without
the pressure of vehicles behind you.
What should I practice first?
Practice driving with your hands in the proper position. If you look at the steering
wheel as the face of a clock, a 9 and 3 or an 8 and 4 position is recommended.
Work on left and right turns, smooth braking, and controlled starts and stops. Use
hand over hand steering for turning.
Driver readiness
Before you drive your vehicle you should do the following:
1. 	Adjust the seat properly.
2. 	Adjust all mirrors.
3. 	Test the foot and parking/emergency brakes
4. 	Adjust and fasten the safety belt.
5. 	Lock the doors.
6. 	Turn on the headlights.
Stopping Your Vehicle
Even when road and vehicle conditions are ideal, and the driver is perfectly alert, it
takes a great distance to stop a motor vehicle. To stop your vehicle, four things must
happen:
1. 	You must see and recognize the danger and the need to stop.

-- 26 of 76 --

26
2. 	Your brain must tell your foot to step on the brakes.
3. 	Your foot must move to the brake pedal and operate the brake.
4. 	Your brakes must work correctly.
The distance your vehicle travels from the moment you see danger until you step on
the brake is called reaction distance. After seeing danger, it takes the average driver
about 3/4 of a second to apply the brakes. The higher the driving speed, the further the
vehicle will travel before the driver is able to apply the brakes. The distance your vehicle
travels from the time the brakes are applied to the time that the
vehicle is brought to a stop is called braking distance. Braking
distance will vary depending on the conditions of the road. It is
important to realize that on wet, icy or gravel roads, the braking
distance will be much longer. When it first starts to rain, oil, rubber,
dirt and water combined make roads especially slippery, which
increases your braking distance.
Signals
The law states that a driver must use a turn signal not less than 100 feet before making
a turn or changing lanes. Signaling three to five seconds before any of these actions
covers this requirement. Applying your brakes will signal vehicles behind you that you
are planning to slow down or stop. If your vehicle’s directional lights or brake lights are
not working, you must use hand signals to let other drivers know you are planning to stop
or turn. Directional lights or brake lights which do not work must be fixed immediately.
Left Turns
Many crashes take place when one motor vehicle is turning left. Most of these
collisions would not happen if the driver made the turn properly.
Upon approaching an intersection at which you wish to make a left turn, you must
signal 3 to 5 seconds in advance to warn others of your intention to
turn. Then as you gradually slow down, check the rear view mirror to
see that the driver of the vehicle behind you has understood your
signal. Be sure no bicyclist or motor vehicle behind you is trying to
pass on your left. On a multilane road, always make sure you’re in the
left lane well in advance of the turn. Never move suddenly from the
right lane to the left lane.
When you reach your turn, wait until there are no oncoming vehicles before making
your turn. Position your vehicle within one foot of the centerline, if it is safe to do so.
Keep your wheels straight until you are ready to turn - that way you will not be pushed
into oncoming traffic if you are hit from behind. 	Any oncoming motor vehicle or
bicyclist has the right-of-way. Always remember to look for pedestrians who may be
crossing the street you are going to turn into. If pedestrians are present you must yield
the right-of-way to them.
When the road is clear, make your turn at the proper speed and keep to the right of
the center line. After completing your turn, check the rearview mirror and center your
vehicle in the lane.
 	Well ahead of turn, look for any following vehicles and move within one foot of the
center line giving signal if needed for moving over.

-- 27 of 76 --

27
 	Signal 3 to 5 seconds before turn and begin slowing down.
 	Search the intersection right, front, and left before starting to make turn.
 	Enter street just to right of center line.
 	After completing turn, check rearview mirror and center vehicle in your lane.
Right Turns
At the approach to a right turn the vehicle should be about three
feet from the right side of the road. Do not swing your vehicle to the
left before turning right. Signal 3 to 5 seconds in advance to warn
others of your intention to turn. Then as you gradually slow down,
check the mirror to see that the driver of the vehicle behind you has
understood your signal. Search the intersection left, front, and right
before starting to make your turn.
Always remain alert for the presence of bicyclists or pedestrians on the right side of
the road as you make your turn. You must yield to any pedestrian or bicyclist.
Make your turn close to the right side of your lane. After completing your turn, check
your rearview mirror and center your vehicle in the lane.
 	Well ahead of the turn, look for any following vehicles and move over to the right
side of your lane.
 	Signal 3 to 5 seconds before turn and begin slowing down.
 	Search the intersection left, front, right and quickly left again just before starting your
turn.
 	Keep close to right while turning. After completing turn, check mirror, and center
vehicle in your lane.
NOTE: If you are turning into a street with more than one lane going in your direction,
turn into the nearest lane.
Then follow the basic rule of driving on a multilane road: Drive to the right unless
you are passing or turning.
A Visual Search Pattern
A driver should be constantly looking for potential hazards, including pedestrians,
bicyclists, and other vulnerable users. A visual search pattern is an orderly way to search
for hazards in all directions. A repeating search pattern can help the driver notice
changing road conditions as well as changes in and around their intended path of travel.
Four Seconds - A Safe Following Distance
How do you know if you are driving too close to the vehicle in front of you? Using
the 4-second method, you should have enough space between your vehicle and the
vehicle in front of you in case you must stop quickly. However, if you are driving in poor
road conditions, when visibility is poor or driving at higher speeds, you should allow
more than four seconds of following distance. The distance between your vehicle and the
vehicle in front of you should be determined by speed and existing conditions.

-- 28 of 76 --

28
Follow These Steps for Four-Second Safety Spacing
1. 	The vehicle ahead is about to pass a checkpoint such as a sign, driveway, pole, or
parked vehicle.
2. 	Start counting seconds as the rear of that vehicle passes the checkpoint.
3. 	Stop counting when your vehicle reaches the checkpoint. If it takes less than four
seconds for your vehicle to reach that point, you are following too closely and must
increase your following distance. If it takes four or more seconds to pass the
checkpoint, you have a safe following distance.
NOTE: An easy method to count seconds is to count "one thousand one, one thousand
two."
Speed Limits and Safe Speeds
The maximum speed for any vehicle on all Vermont roads is 50 miles per hour or as
posted. The maximum speed for any vehicle on an Interstate in Vermont is 65 miles per
hour or as posted. The law states that a motor vehicle shall be driven at all times so that
it is under control. A vehicle must be driven at a speed that is reasonable considering the
dangers that may exist on the road. At intersections, on curves, in heavy traffic, through
construction zones, during bad weather, and when pedestrians or bicyclists are present,
you must drive at a speed that is safe for the driving conditions. Many crashes are caused
by driving too fast for conditions. Sometimes even 10 miles per hour can be an unsafe
speed.
Right-of-way
1. 	A driver on any road must yield the right-of-way
to pedestrians, bicyclists and other traffic already
in the intersection.
2. 	When nearing an intersection marked with a "yield
right-of-way" sign, you are required to travel at a
speed slow enough to be able to stop if necessary.
Enter only when the way is clear.
3. 	At a four-way stop, the first vehicle to arrive
should have the right-of-way.
4. 	When two vehicles approach a four-way stop
intersection at approximately the same time,
coming from different directions, the driver on the
left should yield the right-of-way to the driver on
the right.
5. 	If you are turning left, you must yield to all
oncoming traffic. Any vehicle coming toward you, whether it is a motor vehicle or
a bicyclist, has the right of way.
6. 	A driver who is approaching the road from a driveway, alley, parking lot, or T-
intersection must yield the right-of-way to all traffic on the road.
7. 	Before entering any intersection, you must always search in all directions. Be sure
you have a clear path before entering the intersection.

-- 29 of 76 --

29
Parking Your Vehicle
There are many options for parking offered in the driving environment. These include
parallel parking, angle parking (left or right), and perpendicular parking (left or right –
forward or backward). Don’t cross the center line to park. For more information on
parallel parking see the “road test” section of this study guide.
A vehicle parked on a 2-lane road must have the right wheels within 12 inches of the
right side of the road or curb. On a one-way road the vehicle must be positioned within
12 inches of the side of the road. Your vehicle must be parked in the same direction as
traffic flow.
If you must park on a highway in a rural area, you must have all wheels off the
traveled portion of the road. Be careful not to stop on a hill, curve, or where your vehicle
cannot be seen for at least 150 feet in either direction, or in any area posted for no parking.
Parking on Hills
When parking on a hill, you must be sure your vehicle will not roll out into traffic.
Always turn the front wheels and set the
parking brake to prevent the vehicle from
rolling into traffic. (The procedures for uphill
and downhill parking pictured here apply to
parking on the right side of the street or
roadway).
Where You May Not Park
• 	On the traveled portion of the highway
• 	Beside a vehicle stopped or parked at the side of a street
• 	On a sidewalk
• 	Within an intersection
• 	On a crosswalk
• 	Beside any road work, so that you block traffic
• 	On a bridge or in a tunnel
• 	On any railroad tracks, or within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing
• 	In front of any driveway
• 	Within 6 feet of a fire hydrant
• 	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection
• 	Within 30 feet of a flashing red or yellow light, stop sign, or traffic light
• 	Within 20 feet of the driveway of a fire station or across the street within 75 feet of
the driveway, when there are signs
• 	Any place where an official sign says - No Parking
• 	On a marked bicycle lane.
• 	In a marked disabled parking area
Roundabouts
A roundabout is an intersection control feature where traffic enters and exits only
through right turns and proceeds in a counter clockwise direction. Roundabouts reduce
vehicular delay, crashes, fuel consumption, and air pollution. In most situations,

-- 30 of 76 --

30
roundabouts can handle motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists more safely than stop
signs or traffic signals. Vehicle speeds approaching, within, and exiting the roundabout
should be slow.
Drivers must yield the right of way to traffic in the roundabout. Enter the roundabout
only when there is a safe gap in traffic. Like all intersections, you must also yield to
pedestrians and bicyclists when entering or exiting a roundabout. Always use your signal
to show your intention to exit the roundabout.
Some roundabouts have more than one circulating lane for traffic. These require the
user to pay special attention to the lane assignment signs and pavement markings before
entering the roundabout in order to select the proper lane. Driving with extra caution is
needed when negotiating a multi-lane roundabout. Drivers may not change lanes once in
the roundabout. Drivers must use proper mirror
and blind spot checks before exiting the inside
lane.
When entering a two-lane roundabout with no
signs or arrows the right lane is permitted to make
right turning or through movements while the left
lane is permitted to make left turns or through
movements.
Emergency vehicles in a roundabout
Always yield to emergency vehicles. If you are not
already in the roundabout pull over and let the
emergency vehicles pass. If you are already in the
roundabout pull over when you have safely exited
the roundabout.
Police Stops
• 	Police vehicles attempting to stop drivers will do so by turning on flashing
lights, or flashing lights and a siren.
• 	Drive as close as you safely can to the right side of the road. Do not stop in an
intersection or pull into the center median of a divided highway.
• 	Keep your safety belt fastened until the officer has seen you wearing it.
• 	Limit your movements and those of any passengers.
• 	Take a deep breath and don’t panic. Remain calm while the officer explains why
you have been stopped.
• 	Show your license, vehicle registration, and proof of insurance when requested
by the officer.
• 	Stay in your vehicle. Do not get out unless requested. This is for your safety and
the safety of the officer.
• 	If in a dimly lit area turn on the vehicle’s interior lights, after stopping, and
before the officer approaches.
• 	Roadside isn’t the place to argue traffic offenses. There will be time in court to
address the offense.

-- 31 of 76 --

31
Move Over Law
If you see or hear a vehicle with flashing blue
or red signal lights and/or sounding a siren,
approaching from any direction, the law says
you must pull over to the right side of the road
and stop. You must remain stopped until the
emergency or law enforcement vehicle has gone
by.
If you see a police vehicle with flashing blue lights, or an emergency vehicle with
flashing red lights, which is stopped, you must always proceed with caution (slow down).
If you are on a four-lane highway, such as an Interstate, the law also requires you to make
a lane change if you can do so safely.
The law also requires drivers yield the right of way to any state, city or town
maintenance vehicle working on a highway. For example, a driver approaching a
snowplow with lights flashing must proceed with caution and yield the right of way.
NOTE: Towing and repair vehicles usually have amber-colored flashing lights. You
must use the same caution and procedures described above when you approach these
stopped vehicles.
TRAFFIC LIGHTS, ROAD SIGNS, AND HIGHWAY MARKINGS
Traffic Lights
Traffic signals control the right of way and provide for a smooth, orderly flow of
traffic. If a signal light is dark, as in a power failure, stop as if there are stop signs in all
directions. When a traffic signal is out of order and flashes yellow or red, you must obey
that signal.
Red Light: Stop before reaching either the stop line or the crosswalk, whichever comes
first, and wait until the light is green (Green arrow signals may come on while the red
light is displayed, you may proceed in the direction of the green arrow).
Right turns at circular red lights are usually allowed, but only after the driver
has stopped completely, scanned the intersection and yielded the right of way to
pedestrians and other vehicles. Some intersections have signs or symbols that
indicate you cannot turn right on red.
A police officer may direct you through a red light. You should follow the
officer’s directions, with caution.
Yellow Light: This light warns drivers that the light is about to turn red. If
you are too close to the intersection to stop safely, proceed with caution
through the intersection.
Green Light: You may proceed on a green light if it is safe to do so. But, if
you are turning left you must yield the right of way to oncoming vehicles. At
some intersections where special emphasis is needed, a “left turn yield on green
light” sign will be attached to the overhead wire near the signal.

-- 32 of 76 --

32
Flashing Red: The flashing circular red light is like a stop sign. Stop, and proceed after
yielding the right of way to all pedestrians, bicyclists, and vehicles.
Flashing Yellow: Slow down, scan the intersection, yield to any oncoming vehicles
before attempting to make a left turn and proceed with caution.
Arrows
Solid Red Arrow: Drivers intending to turn left must stop and wait. Do not enter an
intersection to turn when a solid red arrow is being displayed.
Solid Yellow Arrow: The left-turn signal is about to change to red and
drivers should prepare to stop or prepare to complete a left turn if they are
legally within the intersection and there is no conflicting traffic present.
Flashing Yellow Arrow: Drivers are allowed to turn left after yielding to
all oncoming traffic and to any pedestrians in the crosswalk. Oncoming
traffic has a green light. Drivers must wait for a safe gap in oncoming
traffic before turning.
Solid Green Arrow: Left turns have the right of way. Oncoming traffic
has a red light.
Road Signs
You can tell what road signs mean by the shape and color as well as the wording. If
the sign is covered by dirt, snow, or anything else, you should know the general meaning
(regulatory, warning, information) of the sign by its shape.
A stop sign has 8 sides. 	It means you must stop scan the
intersection, honor the right of way, and then proceed.
REMEMBER: You are required to stop before the stop line,
crosswalk (marked or unmarked) or the intersecting road,
whichever comes first.
Yield right-of-way signs are the shape of an upside down
triangle, and they mean you should slow down, search and
enter only if the way is clear of pedestrians, bicyclists and
vehicles.
Circular signs with a large X and the letters RR indicate there
is a railroad crossing ahead.

-- 33 of 76 --

33
Crossbuck signs are at all railroad crossings. They indicate
where the tracks are. Slow down, look both ways, and listen
for trains before crossing. 	The smaller signs below the
crossbuck indicate how many tracks there are at the crossing.
When there are 2 or more tracks, one train passing might hide
a train coming the other way. There may also be gates and/or
flashing lights.
A sign in the shape of a triangle with the points cut off is
displayed on vehicles which travel at slow speeds. For
example, you will often see these signs on farm vehicles.
Warning Signs
Warning signs are placed where there is danger at all times, and a driver needs to slow
down. They are usually diamond-shaped and yellow or green. They may warn of sharp
curves, unsafe intersections, or dips in the road. 	Drivers should slow down. 	Some
warning signs give additional information, such as the safe speeds, or a distance, such as
“Deer Crossing, next 3 miles”. A downward arrow under a school or pedestrian sign
indicates a crosswalk or crossing area.
School 	Divided Highway 	Divided Highway
Ends
Lane Ends
Slippery When Wet 	Hill 	Pedestrian Crosswalk
Deer Crossing 	Intersection 	Hidden Road Right

-- 34 of 76 --

34
Regulatory Signs
Rectangular signs with white backgrounds indicate what
things a driver must or must not do. These signs display speed
limits, turning and passing laws, and other directions.
Highway Markings
Highway markings provide important information to
drivers. They help a driver correctly position their vehicle, help
direct them through various situations, let them know when
passing is allowed and warn drivers of upcoming conditions. Major highways are marked
with yellow center lines which serve two purposes:
Center lines divide a highway into travel
lanes. 	Multi-lane 	highways 	without 	a
median have double solid lines to indicate
the two opposing lanes of travel. When two
or more lanes of travel are permitted in the
same direction, a broken white line is used
to divide each side of the highway into
separate lanes for vehicles traveling in the
same direction.
The lines show if you may or may not pass. If there is a solid line or two solid lines,
it is recommended that you do not pass. If there is a solid line but a broken line in your
lane, you may pass if it is clear ahead. If there is a solid line in your lane but a broken
line in the other lane, you should not pass, but the motor
vehicle in the other lane may pass.
Continuous two-way left turn lanes are not designed to
be used as travel lanes since traffic moving in both
directions may want to use the lane to make a left-hand turn.
A short distance prior to your left turn, you should signal
and carefully move into the turning lane. So that you don't
block traffic, all of your vehicle should be in the turn lane.
When the way is clear, proceed with your turn.
Sometimes highway markings provide additional information to the driver. For
example, at a yield intersection, there may be a yield sign beside the highway and there
may also be a yield line painted on the highway. This series of white triangles, pointing
toward approaching cars, shows drivers where they should stop, if they are required to
yield to pedestrians or other vehicles.
Lane use control signs, or pavement markings, may be used to direct drivers into the
correct lane when turning. When driving from one road onto a
multiple lane road where there is a choice of lanes, right turning
drivers must turn into the right lane. Left turning drivers must
first turn into the left lane. When there are two lanes turning in
the same direction each turning lane must stay in their own
turning path throughout the turn. Multiple lanes may turn in the
same direction at the same time when lane use control signs or pavement markings permit
it. Remain in the designated lane until after the turn has been completed. Lane changes

-- 35 of 76 --

35
may 	take 	place 	after 	the 	turn 	has 	been
completed. Avoid changing lanes while turning.
This is an illegal maneuver and leads to crashes.
Drivers must always follow through on the
directions that are indicated in the lane they are
in. For example, if a driver is driving in a lane with a straight arrow, it is illegal and
unsafe to attempt a turn to the right or left once they are at the intersection. A sudden lane
change increases the risk of a crash. It is safer to drive around the block and find an
alternate route to the destination.
WORK ZONE SAFETY
A work zone is an area along a highway where there is construction, maintenance, or
utility work. A work zone may be stationary, or it may be a mobile operation that moves
down the road slowly, as in the case of line striping, mowing, and snow removal.
For your safety, and for the workers’ safety, it is important that drivers slow down
and pay extra attention when approaching and driving through a work zone.
Many crashes occur before the actual work area, where drivers are slowing down
and/or merging. Be courteous, and merge into the appropriate lane as soon as it is safe to
do so.
Most crashes in work zones are rear end crashes that are caused by driving too fast
for conditions and failing to maintain a safe following distance. Remember that stopped
traffic may be hidden around a curve or over a hill.
Tips for Safe Driving in Vermont Work Zones
• 	Rules apply 24/7 - not just during daylight hours.
• 	Slow down to the posted speed limit and adjust for weather conditions.
Speeds are reduced to protect motorists and workers.
• 	Minimize distraction - give your full attention to the road and driving
• 	Expect the unexpected - all modes of travel can be encountered in a work
zone, including pedestrians and bicyclists.
• 	Follow signs -they will guide you through the work zone safely.
• 	Be courteous-Don't change lanes in the work zone, tailgate, or engage in
other aggressive behaviors.
• 	Merge as instructed,as soon as it is safe to do so in the work zone, or as
traffic conditions warrant.
• 	Don't overcrowd the roadway workers or their equipment - give them as
much space as possible.
• 	Maintain a 4 second following distance. It takes 240 feet for a passenger car
to come to a complete stop on dry pavement traveling at 60 MPH, versus 75
feet for the same car to come to a stop at 30 MPH.
• 	Be patient, expect delays, or seek an alternate route. Remember that roadway
workers are improving our highways for your safety.
FINES ARE DOUBLED FOR SPEEDING IN A WORK ZONE

-- 36 of 76 --

36
Work Zone Signs
Work zone signs are orange and diamond or
rectangular shaped. 	They provide important
information to help the driver safely drive through
the work zone. They warn the driver of hazards
ahead, such as closed lanes, detours, rough
pavement, or flaggers.
Flaggers
Traffic is often required to stop in a work zone, to allow construction equipment to
move, or because there is only one lane open for traffic moving in both directions.
Flaggers use stop/slow paddles, or sometimes orange flags, to guide traffic safely through
the work zone. A flagger has the legal authority to control traffic and must be obeyed.
Channeling Devices
Cones, drums, and barricades are often used in work zones to keep traffic out of
hazardous roadwork areas and to guide traffic safely through the work zone.
Flashing arrow panels
Flashing arrow panels may also be used to guide drivers into the correct lane. When
the arrows are not in use, the panels are put in “caution” mode, with a straight line of
blinking lights, or blinking lights on the 4 corners of the sign. Drivers should slow down
when they see the panels in “caution”
mode.
Work zones may have temporary
pavement markings. White markers or
lines separate lanes going in the same
direction. 	Yellow markers or lines separate lanes going in opposite directions. 	The
yellow markings will be on your left-- if they are not, you are in the wrong lane.

-- 37 of 76 --

37
Low Shoulders
Sometimes, especially in construction zones, the road level may be higher than the
shoulder. If your wheels drop off the pavement onto a low shoulder, reduce speed without
braking, and turn back onto the pavement very carefully at a slow speed.
RULES OF THE ROAD AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS
It is against the law to drive your vehicle through, around, or under a closed railroad
gate. It is also against the law to pass another vehicle at a railroad crossing.
The driver of every vehicle shall drive at a safe, reduced speed when approaching and
crossing any public or private railroad grade crossing.
By law, drivers must STOP not less than
15 feet from the nearest rail when:
1. 	Flashing lights, lowered gates, or a
flagman signals the approach or
passage of a railroad train.
2. 	You see a train or hear its whistle.
3. 	When there is a STOP sign at the
crossing.
After bringing the vehicle to a full STOP
when required in the above cases, the motor
vehicle may be driven across the tracks
when it is safe to do so. NOTE: Pedestrians, bicyclists, and moped riders also must
observe railroad warning signals and may not cross railroad tracks until it is safe to do
so.
If a dangerous condition exists at a rail crossing, call the number listed on the
emergency sign. This will allow the rail company to stop or reroute approaching rail
traffic until the hazard is removed. Be sure to give the posted crossing number so that the
hazard can be identified correctly.
SHARING THE ROAD
Sharing the Road with Pedestrians
Drivers must watch carefully for pedestrians. Be especially alert for young, elderly,
disabled or intoxicated pedestrians. They are the most frequent victims in motor vehicle/
pedestrian collisions.

-- 38 of 76 --

38
Many crashes are the result of pedestrians not paying attention to or entering traffic
carelessly, while other crashes are caused by drivers who fail to yield the right-of-way or
do not use caution when pedestrians are present.
Driver Responsibilities
 	Drive slowly and remain alert in areas where pedestrians are present.
 	When a vehicle ahead of you stops for a pedestrian, do not pass the
stopped vehicle even if there are two lanes provided. This is a frequent
cause of death for pedestrians.
 	Watch for pedestrians who are walking against a red light, stepping into
traffic from between parked vehicles and crossing in locations where
there is not a marked crosswalk. Even when pedestrians cross the street
carelessly, the driver must yield.
 	Do not block a crosswalk when stopped or waiting to make a turn.
Blocking a crosswalk with all or part of your vehicle forces pedestrians to
go around you and puts them in a potentially dangerous situation.
 	Watch for pedestrians whenever you cross a sidewalk or road shoulder, such as
entering or leaving an alley, driveway or private road.
 	Use caution when children are playing in or near the street. Children often move
quickly and do not check for traffic.
 	Use caution in the presence of elderly pedestrians. They may not be alert to the
dangers of traffic situations.
 	Do not stop to pick up hitchhikers on the Interstate or the ramps.
 	Use extra caution when approaching a blind pedestrian. When a pedestrian who has
a white cane or is being led by a guide dog is crossing or waiting to cross the street
ahead of you, you must stop and yield the right-of-way.
 	When you are turning, look for and yield to pedestrians crossing side streets.
Many intersections with signals have “No Turn On Red” signs that light up during
pedestrian crossing times. Do not turn right on red when the signs are lit. Remember:
DO NOT turn right on a red arrow.
At marked crosswalks, a pedestrian sign may be placed on the road to remind drivers
that they are required to yield to pedestrians within crosswalks.
School Zones
Be particularly alert at all times for children and pedestrians in a school zone. Also
watch for school buses which may be arriving and departing. 	Signs or flashing lights
warn you that you are approaching a school or school crossing. Many school zones have
lower speed limits, and the speed limit signs will have the words “when flashing” or
“when children are present” to let you know when the speed limit is in effect. Note that
regular school hours are not the only time children are present at schools. After school
and weekend activities often take place at schools.
Children at Play
As a driver, be extra careful in residential areas and at times and places where children
are likely to be present. Teach your own children the rights and duties of pedestrians at

-- 39 of 76 --

39
an early age. Always be extra watchful when backing in or out of a driveway. Children
may run behind or be playing behind your vehicle.
Pedestrian Responsibilities
Although drivers must yield to pedestrians, pedestrians must not suddenly leave a
curb or other safe waiting place and walk into the path of a vehicle if it is so close that it
is an immediate hazard. Vehicles cannot stop at once. Pedestrians should be aware of the
following safety rules and suggestions:
Look in both directions before crossing any street. Always obey "Walk" or "Don't
Walk" signs. Do not start to cross while the pedestrian signal is flashing “Don’t Walk”.
If you have already started to cross during the “walk” signal, you will have time to safely
complete your crossing during the flashing “Don’t Walk”.
When facing a yellow or red light, do not cross unless a "Walk" sign is showing. If
there are no pedestrian signals, cross when the light turns green for the traffic going in
the same direction. Watch for turning vehicles.
When there are sidewalks, pedestrians should not walk on or along the highway. If
there are no sidewalks, you should walk as far as possible to the left side of the road
facing traffic.
Use crosswalks. The main purpose of crosswalks is to encourage pedestrians to cross
only at certain locations where crossings can be made safely.
When walking at dusk or at night, wear light colored or reflective clothing and carry
a light.
Don’t wear headphones, especially in busy areas. Being able to hear approaching
traffic adds to your safety.
Along streets or highways without sidewalks never walk on the right side with back to
traffic. Walk on the left side facing approaching traffic. Wear light-colored clothing if
walking at dawn, at dusk, or after dark. Carry a flashlight and wear reflectorized
clothing.
Sharing the Road with School Buses
School Bus Stops
It is against the law to pass a school bus which has stopped and has its red
warning lights on. Never pass from any direction when the red lights are on.
When a school bus is on the highway and is about to pick up or discharge students,
the school bus driver activates the alternately flashing yellow lights and begins slowing
down. 	You should be preparing to stop. After the bus has stopped, the driver will

-- 40 of 76 --

40
activate the alternately flashing red warning lights. Once the red warning lights have been
activated you must stop your vehicle.
Remember, even in a school yard, you must not pass a stopped school bus with its
alternately flashing red warning lights activated.
There are a few exceptions where a stop is not necessary. You do not have to stop on
a divided highway if the school bus is traveling in the opposite direction. A concrete
barrier may be used to separate traffic from the bus, and you are not required to stop.
In Vermont, if you are found guilty of passing a stopped school bus with its warning
lights on, you will be subject to a substantial fine and five points on your driver’s license.
Sharing the Road with Bicyclists
The number of people riding bicycles on streets and highways is growing daily, both
for exercise and transportation use. Under state law bicyclists have the right to operate
on all roads, unless they are specially prohibited, such as on limited-access highways like
the Interstate.
The same traffic rules and regulations for vehicle drivers apply to bicyclists.
Bicycles, however, are quieter and less visible than other vehicles, especially at night.
As a motorist you should drive defensively around a bicyclist because the slightest
mistake could cause serious injury or death. When you approach a bicyclist, keep on the
lookout and slow down. Give them plenty of room when passing and be prepared to stop
suddenly. Do not honk at a bicyclist unless you have good cause to warn them. The loud
noise could startle the rider and cause them to lose control. It is important to remember
that bicyclists have the same rights and duties as motor vehicle operators. To avoid
conflict, drivers of motor vehicles need to know the rules:
Driver Responsibilities
 	Share the road with bicyclists; they have a legal right to ride on the road. Drivers
must be courteous and cautious even if it takes a little longer.
 	Be aware that bicyclists are allowed to ride as far to the left as needed, when necessary
to be safe.
 	In some instances it is safest for a bicyclist to “take the lane” by riding toward the
center of the lane. There may be reasons for the bicyclist to be riding in the travel
lane, such as roadway hazards not visible to motorists, or to position themselves
correctly in the proper travel lane.
 	Learn to recognize situations and obstacles which may be hazardous to cyclists, such
as potholes, drain grates, railroad tracks and narrow bridges or roadways. Give them
adequate space to maneuver.
 	Be aware that when a bicyclist is making a left turn, the cyclist should signal and
move to the left side of the lane or into the turning lane. This is the proper maneuver
and the cyclist should be allowed to safely complete the turn before being overtaken
by motor vehicle traffic.
 	Leave at least four feet of passing space between the right side of your vehicle and a
bicyclist. If the road is too narrow for motor vehicles and bicycles to ride safely side
by side, wait until it is safe to pass the bicyclist without forcing them off the side of
the road.

-- 41 of 76 --

41
 	Be aware that two bicyclists may legally ride side by side. Slow down until it is safe
to pass, or give them time to adjust their position. Even then, do not pass the bicyclists
until it is safe.
 	When turning left at an intersection, yield to oncoming bicyclists just as you would
yield to oncoming motorists. Bicyclists may be traveling faster than you realize, so
give them adequate space.
Common Vehicle-caused Collisions with Bicycles
Four common errors could cause you to strike a bicyclist:
1. 	Turning left without noticing/yielding to an oncoming bicyclist.
2. 	Turning right at an intersection or driveway without checking for a bicyclist on
the right who is continuing straight ahead or coming off a sidewalk.
3. 	Entering or crossing a street without checking for a bicyclist in the street or on
the sidewalk.
4. 	Opening a vehicle door into the path of a bicyclist.
Bicyclists Responsibilities
Bicyclists are valid road users and have all the rights and responsibilities of other
vehicle drivers. Although a license isn’t required to ride a bicycle, bicyclists must obey
all the rules of the road. Bicyclists are allowed to ride two abreast so long as they do not
impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic. Obey the following rules for a safe and
legal cycling experience:
 	Obey all traffic signals and signs. If you break any traffic laws, you are subject to a
ticket and fines.
 	Ride with traffic. Always ride with through traffic on the right side of the road. If
you approach a right turn lane and intend to go straight, do not enter the right turn
lane.
 	Ride in a predictable manner. Always ride in a straight line; do not weave in and out
of parked cars. If the road is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel side by
side, the bicyclist should occupy the lane until it is safe to move back to the right.
Check over your shoulder before changing your lane position and do not weave
between parked vehicles.
 	Signaling turns. You must always signal your intent to turn, using the proper hand
signals. Look to make sure lanes are clear of traffic before you make a lane change
or turn.
Bicycle Hand Signal

-- 42 of 76 --

42
Sharing the Road with Skateboards, Scooters, etc.
Of recent special concern are personal wheeled transportation users such as
skateboarders, roller-bladers, nonmotorized scooters, electric wheelchairs, etc. People
using the roadway with these types of devices can sometimes be traveling at a significant
rate of speed. Users can move abruptly and change direction unexpectedly into your
travel path. Be especially alert and cautious around these types of roadway users.
Sharing the Road with Motorcycles
Today’s motorcycle riders are friends, relatives and neighbors. The motorcyclist has
the same rights and responsibilities on the highway as drivers of other vehicles. Motorists
should recognize this and not attempt to crowd motorcycles or take the right-of-way from
cyclists. Motorcyclists on the other hand must operate as responsible road users and not
attempt to take advantage of the cycle’s narrow silhouette and maneuverability.
Motorcyclists often slow by downshifting or merely rolling off the throttle, thus not
activating the brake light. Allow more than 4 seconds of following distance. At
intersections, predict a motorcyclist may slow down without visual warning.
Turn signals on a motorcycle usually are not self-canceling, thus some riders,
(especially beginners) sometimes forget to turn them off after a turn or lane change. Make
sure a motorcycle’s signal is for real.
Motorcyclists often adjust position within a lane to be seen more easily and to
minimize the effects of wind, road debris, and passing vehicles. Understand that
motorcyclists adjust lane position for a purpose, not to be reckless or show off.
Because of its small size a motorcycle seems to be moving faster than it really is.
Don’t think motorcyclists are speed demons.
Because of its small size, a motorcycle may look farther away than it is. When
checking traffic to turn at an intersection, predict a motorcycle is closer than it looks.
Because of its small size, a motorcycle can be easily hidden by objects inside or
outside a car (door posts, mirrors, passengers, bushes, trees, parked cars, fences, bridges,
blind spots, etc). Take an extra moment to thoroughly check traffic, whether you’re
changing lanes or turning at intersections.
Stopping distance for motorcycles is nearly the same as for cars, but slippery
pavement makes stopping quickly difficult. Allow more following distance behind a
motorcycle because it can’t always stop “on a dime”.
Maneuverability is one of a motorcycle’s better characteristics, especially at slower
speeds and with good road conditions. But don’t expect a motorcyclist to always be able
to dodge out of the way.
Carrying a passenger complicates a motorcyclist’s task. Balance is more difficult.
Stopping distance is increased. Maneuverability is reduced. Predict more problems when
you see two on a motorcycle, especially near intersections.
Mirrors are smaller on a motorcycle and usually convex. This gives the motorcyclist
a smaller image of you and makes you appear farther back than you actually are. Keep at
least a four second space cushion when following a motorcyclist.
There are a lot more cars and trucks than motorcycles on the road, and some drivers
don’t “recognize” a motorcycle and ignore it (usually unintentionally). Look for
motorcycles, especially when checking traffic at an intersection.
At night, single headlights and taillights on motorcycles can blend into the lights of
other traffic. Those “odd” lights could be a motorcycle.

-- 43 of 76 --

43
Motorcycles are entitled to a full lane. When passing a motorcycle, change lanes
completely. Never cut in too closely just after you have overtaken a motorcycle. Be sure
to use your turn signals to alert a rider of your intention to pass, change lanes or turn.
Allow a passing motorcyclist plenty of room and never try to speed up to stay ahead of a
motorcycle passing you.
When a motorcycle is in motion, don’t think of it as motorcycle; think of it as a
person.
Note: More information about motorcycle laws and rules, and how to obtain a
motorcycle permit or endorsement, can be found in the Vermont Motorcycle Manual.
Sharing the Road with Large Trucks
Each year there are more than 250,000 crashes involving passenger vehicles and large
trucks. In more than 70% of fatal crashes involving automobiles and trucks, it was the
driver of the other vehicle, not the truck driver, who caused the
crash. 	Most crashes involving automobiles and trucks occur in
daylight on straight and dry pavement under good weather
conditions. Trucks are much bigger and heavier than other vehicles.
In four out of five fatal crashes involving trucks, the driver of the
other vehicle was killed. Many of these crashes could be avoided
if motorists knew about truck limitations and how to steer clear of
unsafe situations involving trucks.
Remember, trucks don't drive like other vehicles. Generally
speaking, the bigger the truck is:
 	The bigger the driver’s blind spots.
 	The more room the truck needs to maneuver.
 	The longer it takes the truck to stop.
 	The longer it takes you to pass it.
WATCH BLIND SPOTS—THE “NO-ZONES”
Large trucks have blind spots, or No-Zones, around the front, back and sides of the
truck. A truck could even turn into you, because these No-Zones make it difficult for the
driver to see. Don’t hang out in the No-Zones. 	Remember, if you can’t see the trucks
rear (side) view mirrors then the truck driver can’t see you.
Passing
It takes longer to pass a large truck. You should maintain a consistent speed when
passing. Be sure you can see the cab of the truck in your inside rearview mirror before
returning to the right lane. When vehicles pull in front of a truck too soon, the truck
driver may have to act quickly to avoid a crash.
Backing Up
When a truck driver is backing up, he sometimes must temporarily block the street to
maneuver his trailer. Never go around a truck that is preparing to back up or is in the
process of backing up. Most trailers can completely hide objects that suddenly come

-- 44 of 76 --

44
between them and a loading area. If you try to go around the truck, you can enter a blind
spot and the truck driver can’t see you.
Rear Blind spots
Unlike other motor vehicles, trucks have long blind spots directly behind them. The
truck driver can't see your vehicle in this position, and your own view of traffic flow is
severely reduced. Following too closely greatly increases your chance of a rear-end
collision with a truck. If you can’t see the trucks side rearview mirrors, then the truck
driver can’t see you.
Side Blind spots
Trucks have much larger blind spots on both sides of their vehicles than passenger
vehicles. When you drive in these blind spots for any length of time, you can't be seen by
the truck driver. If a truck driver needs to change lanes quickly for any reason, a serious
crash could occur if your vehicle is in the truck driver’s blind spot.
Wide Turn
Always look for the truck’s turn signals. Truck drivers often need to swing wide to
the left in order to make a right turn. They cannot see vehicles directly behind or beside
them. Do not cut in between the truck and the curb or shoulder to the right; this increases
the possibility of a crash.
Sharing the Road with Slow Moving Vehicles
A slow moving vehicle, such as a tractor or other piece of large farm machinery is
unable to travel at highway speed. It is identified by an orange and red triangular sign
mounted on the rear of the vehicle. These signs help motorists recognize
the vehicle ahead more quickly. The sooner you can identify a slow moving
vehicle the more time you have to respond by reducing your speed. Slow
moving vehicles may make wide turns at unmarked entrances to the right
or left of the roadway. Some farm equipment is wider than the road itself.
Some wagons, or equipment, may sway on the roadway and you might not be able to see
the driver.
When driving a slow moving vehicle causes traffic delays, it may
pull over to the side of the road, if and when it is possible and safe to
do so, in order to let others go by safely. Agricultural vehicle
operators have a right to drive their vehicles on the road. Keep a safe
following distance behind slow moving vehicles so the operator can
see you, or you can see them, if possible. It may be necessary to allow for more than a
four second following distance. Yield to wide equipment on narrow roads. Pass slow
moving vehicles cautiously, and only if conditions are safe, and there is no on-coming
traffic. Be patient and be alert to possible turning vehicles. Share the road safely with
large and slow moving vehicles. Watch “Keeping our Rural Roads Safe in Vermont.”

-- 45 of 76 --

45
Aggressive Drivers
Aggressive drivers may not be thinking about the consequences of their actions when
they drive too fast and pass when it is unsafe. They may fail to use signals for lane
changes and may weave in and out of traffic, follow too closely and cut off cars as they
try to get ahead. All these actions are unlawful and can result in traffic tickets or worse.
Aggressive drivers may also yell, honk their horns and flash their lights at other drivers.
If an aggressive driver cuts you off or does something else that is unsafe, do not try
to get even. Stay calm. Get out of the drivers way. Don’t challenge them. Trying to get
even with the aggressive driver is a bad idea.
Sharing the Road with Domestic Animals
When on a public highway a person riding an animal, or driving an animal drawn
vehicle, is granted all the rights of a driver of a motor vehicle. It shall be necessary for a
motor vehicle operator to reduce speed when coming upon such a situation,
and possibly even stop, in order to exercise every reasonable precaution
to prevent the frightening of the animal/animals and to insure the safety
and protection of the rider/driver. A motor vehicle operator should
never blow their horn or rev their engine, especially when operating a
motorcycle, so as not to startle the animal/animals when meeting ,
following, or passing such animals. Use the full traffic lane to completely pass the animal
and never cut quickly back into your lane. When following a horse with a rider, horse
and wagon, or herded animals, leave at least a 4 second following distance. A motor
vehicle operator may be fined or imprisoned for negligent operation of a motor vehicle
around such animals.
Moose and Deer Safety
A collision with a moose or deer can be fatal not only to the animal, but to the driver
and passengers of a vehicle. 	Driving cautiously in those areas on the highway marked
with deer and moose crossing signs can save lives and prevent
injuries. The presence of moose and deer on highways is most likely
to occur during late evening, night time and early morning hours.
Use caution when driving during those hours when deer and moose
tend to roam or feed.
The light from vehicle headlights may cause a deer to
temporarily freeze and be unable to get out of the way of a vehicle,
or it may bound at speeds up to 40 miles per hour towards their habitat. This means that
if a deer is on the opposite side of the road from its habitat, it may turn and bolt in front
of a vehicle. 	Animals travel in pairs, so be prepared to see a second one once you see
the first.
Collisions with moose are more deadly to motorists. Moose weigh much more than
deer—more than a thousand pounds. Also, they are much taller than deer, and in a
collision can land on top of the vehicle and its occupants with crushing force. Deer eyes
reflect headlights. Because moose are taller, their eyes may not reflect in the vehicle’s
headlights. Also, moose are more darkly colored than deer. These characteristics make
moose especially difficult to see in the evening hours.

-- 46 of 76 --

46
HAZARDOUS DRIVING CONDITIONS
Floods and Storms
Nationally, flash floods are responsible for more deaths than any other weather event.
Nearly half of these fatalities are vehicle related. Storms, blizzards and other severe
weather systems create hazardous driving conditions such as, high winds, limited
visibility, slippery roads, and other unexpected hazards. When hazardous driving
conditions are predicted, it’s best to stay home and avoid unnecessary travel. However,
if you are caught out in a storm or come upon a hazardous situation,
you should do the following:
 	Reduce your speed. Do not use cruise control. Stay alert.
 	Keep more than four seconds of space between you and the
motor vehicle in front of you.
 	Be especially alert at night or when driving on unfamiliar roads.
 	Be aware that bridges, culverts, and roadbeds may be washed
away or undermined by flood waters. Do not drive around traffic barricades or past
“road closed” signs. Obey all detour signs.
 	Do not drive where water is over the road. The depth of water is not always obvious
and the water may hide danger such as washouts. Vehicle motors will stall in water,
and you could become stranded or trapped.
 	If your vehicle stalls in a flooded area, abandon it as soon as possible. Flood waters
can rise rapidly and sweep away a car and its occupants. Many deaths have resulted
from attempts to move stalled vehicles. If you choose to abandon your vehicle in a
flooded area, respect the forces of running water. As little as 4 inches of water can
make it difficult to walk and can obstruct hazards from view.
 	Wind can be a problem for all motorists. It is especially hazardous for large vehicles
and for drivers towing trailers. Driving at slower speeds is the best practice.
 	Be aware that strong winds and heavy snow or ice may cause trees and wires to fall
into the roadway. Never get near or cross downed wires.
 	Check for weather and flash flood warnings issued by the Weather Service, as well
as all notices regarding hazardous driving conditions.
 	When visibility is poor, such as in fog, heavy rain, or heavy snow, use your low beam
headlights. If you cannot clearly see persons or vehicles 500 feet ahead, the law
requires drivers to have headlights turned on.
Winter Driving
Winter is the most difficult driving season, so use extra caution. Not only do you
have snow and ice to deal with, but there are fewer hours of daylight as well.
• 	Make sure your brakes, windshield wipers, defroster, heater and exhaust system are
in top condition.
• 	Check your antifreeze, and be ready for colder temperatures. Be sure the windshield
washer reservoir is filled with a fluid made for winter use.
• 	Make sure you’ve got good snow tires on all four wheels, and put them on early. Try
not to get caught without them in the first snowfall. Never combine different types

-- 47 of 76 --

47
of tires on the same vehicle. Many states allow tires with metal studs to be used only
in winter conditions. Always be sure the tires are properly inflated.
• 	During ice or snow storms, especially when a traveler’s advisory is issued, don’t drive
unless absolutely necessary. If you must drive, completely clear the ice and snow
from your entire vehicle and be sure your wipers are clear of any ice buildup. 	The
inside of your windows should also be free of moisture.
• 	When sleet, freezing rain or snow start to fall, black ice can quickly form and you
may not be able to see it. Bridges, ramps, and overpasses are likely to freeze first.
Slippery spots may still remain after road crews have cleared the highways.
• 	Since you will need to drive more slowly, allow more time to reach your destination.
Increase your following distance to more than 4 seconds. Even vehicles with four
wheel or all wheel drive do not have good traction on ice. All vehicles have difficulty
stopping, going through curves, and changing lanes on winter roads.
• 	Be especially careful near snowplows—they are hard to see because of the blowing
snow they create. They are wider than other vehicles, and often move more slowly.
• 	Travel in the day, don’t travel alone, and keep others informed of your route and
schedule. Stay on main roads—avoid back road shortcuts.
• 	Be prepared. Items you should keep in your vehicle include: windshield scraper and
brush, small shovel, kitty litter or sand, extra clothing, food and water, cell phone,
extra windshield washer fluid, a basic first aid kit, and flashlight. Always have at
least a half tank of gas in your vehicle.
If you are caught in a blizzard or stranded
• 	Pull off the highway. Turn on hazard lights and hang a distress flag from the door
handle, an antenna or window.
• 	Remain in your vehicle where rescuers are most likely to find you. Do not set out on
foot unless you can see a building close by where you know you can take shelter. Be
careful: distances are distorted by blowing snow. A building may seem close, but
actually be too far to walk to in deep snow.
• 	Run the engine and heater about 10 minutes each hour to keep warm. When the engine
is running, open a downwind window slightly for ventilation. To help protect from
possible carbon monoxide poisoning, keep snow clear from the exhaust pipe.
• 	Exercise to maintain body heat, but avoid overdoing it. In extreme cold, use road
maps, seat covers, and floor mats for insulation. Huddle with passengers, and use
your coat for a blanket.
• 	Take turns sleeping. One person should be awake at all times to look for rescue crews.
• 	Drink fluids to avoid dehydration. However, do not drink alcohol.
• 	Be careful not to waste battery power. Balance electrical energy needs—the use of
lights, heat, and radio—with supply.
• 	Turn on the inside light at night so work crews or rescuers can see you.
• 	If stranded in a remote area, stomp large block letters in an open area spelling out
HELP or SOS, and line them with rocks or tree limbs to attract the attention of rescue
personnel who may be searching the area by airplane.

-- 48 of 76 --

48
Skidding
Most skids are caused by the driver's failure to react in time to adjust the vehicle's
speed to road and traffic conditions. These conditions may include snow, ice, rain,
dirt/gravel, and wet leaves. Do not use cruise control in these situations. In a rear-wheel
drive vehicle, you can usually feel a loss of traction or the beginning of a skid. There may
be no such warning in a front-wheel drive, however. Front-wheel drives do handle better
in snow, but they do not have flawless traction, and skids can occur unexpectedly. Don’t
let the better feel and handling of a front-wheel drive vehicle cause you to drive faster
than you should.
How to Avoid Skidding
On roads that may be slippery you should drive at a slower speed. Don’t make any
sudden changes in speed or direction. To slow down on a slippery road, you should take
your foot off the gas pedal to lower your speed and help keep your vehicle under control.
If you need to slow down more, gently “squeeze” your brakes with a slow, steady
pressure. Allow the wheels to keep rolling. If they start to lock up, ease off the brake
pedal. As you slow down, it may also be helpful to shift into a lower gear. If your vehicle
is equipped with anti-lock brakes use steady brake pressure, do not pump the brakes!
Follow the instructions in your owner's manual.
How to Control a Vehicle in a Skid
The best approach to recovering from a skid is the same for both front and rear-wheel
drive vehicles:
 	Don’t hit the brakes, it will just make the skid worse.
 	Steer in the direction you want the vehicle to go.
 	You might have to steer left and right a few times to get your vehicle completely
under control.
NOTE: Vehicle improvements, such as stability control, may also help you handle your
vehicle, but they cannot be a substitute for driver caution. Four-wheel drive and all-wheel
drive vehicles have better traction in snow, but not on ice. Be wary of over-confidence
using these vehicles.
No matter what type of vehicle you have, it’s a good idea to go to an empty parking
lot and learn how your vehicle handles on icy or snowy surfaces.
Anti-lock Brakes
Anti-lock brakes are an important breakthrough in safety. They allow you to brake
and steer at the same time. 	Expect noise and vibration in the brake pedal. Don’t pump

-- 49 of 76 --

49
the brake or take your foot off the brake pedal because it will disengage the anti-lock
system.
Your owner’s manual will tell you if your vehicle has ABS. Also, an ABS warning
light will display briefly on your instrument panel when you start your vehicle.
Note: If your ABS light stays on after you begin to drive, your vehicle’s ABS system is
not working. However, the vehicle does still have brakes.
Reduced Visibility
Daytime Driving
Studies have shown that driving with low beam headlights on during the daytime
reduces the risk of head-on collisions by more than 20%. Automobile manufacturers
have installed daytime running lights on many vehicles. These lights come on
automatically and should not be confused with your headlights. Daytime running lights
and headlights can help other drivers to see your vehicle during daylight hours.
Remember, when snow, rain, and fog limit visibility you must turn your headlights on.
The best practice is to always drive with at least your low beam headlights on, even in
the daytime.
Note: Parking lights are to be used only when your vehicle is parked.
Night Driving
It is more dangerous to drive at night than in the daytime because you cannot see as
far ahead at night. The law requires headlights on vehicles to be turned on a half hour
after sunset to a half hour before sunrise. Be sure to turn on your headlights—your
daytime running lights may give you the impression that your headlights are on.
You always need to be able to see 4 seconds ahead. When driving at night at 40 miles
an hour, with low beam headlights, you are “overdriving your headlights”. This means
that you cannot see far enough ahead to stop in the space you can see, and you may not
be able to avoid a collision.
USE HIGH AND LOW HEADLIGHT BEAMS PROPERLY
Use high beam when driving in the open country with few other vehicles. Even with
the high beams, speed must be lower than by day.
Always use low beam when approaching other vehicles or pedestrians so as not to
blind the driver or pedestrian. Also use low beam when driving in areas with streetlights
or fog and when following another vehicle.
Courteous Drivers Dim Their Headlights
When driving a motor vehicle at night, you should promptly dim your headlights
when meeting or following another vehicle
Approaching Headlights
If you look directly at oncoming lights, you could be blinded for several seconds. To
avoid being temporarily blinded, you should look ahead towards the right edge of the

-- 50 of 76 --

50
highway until the bright lights have gone by and your vision has returned to normal. This
practice will also help you detect bicyclists or pedestrians who may be close to the edge
of the road.
INTERSTATE DRIVING
Interstates are multiple-lane, divided roads designed for high-speed travel. In various
areas they are known as expressways, throughways, turnpikes, toll roads, limited access
highways or freeways. Some are free, and some require payment of a toll.
They all have several important advantages. They are multi-lane and controlled-
access roads upon which you may drive for very long distances without interruption.
These roads are designed for quicker and safer travel. It is important that you learn to use
these roads properly.
Speed-Change Lanes (Acceleration and Deceleration)
There are lanes running alongside the Interstate for a short distance, which connect
entrance or exit ramps (roads) to the interstate. These
are made for vehicles to speed up or slow down when
entering or exiting the traffic lanes.
Entrance Ramp
This is a short one-way road that leads onto the
interstate. You need to look carefully to enter into fast moving traffic. The entrance ramp
takes you to the acceleration lane where vehicles are moving up to interstate speeds. Stay
to the right, signal left, speed up, check blind spot over left shoulder and make a lane
change when the travel lane is safe. The entering driver must yield to drivers already on
the interstate.
Exit Ramp
This is a short one-way road which connects the interstate to another road and allows
you to exit at a safe speed. When leaving an interstate
you should signal for a lane change, move to the
deceleration lane closest to the exit, and slow down to
the posted exit speed.
Safe Driving on the Interstate
1. 	Keep your eyes moving to know what is going on around you, and check your
mirrors often.
2. 	Don't tailgate. The easiest way to tell if you are a safe distance from the vehicle ahead
of you is to use the 4-second distance rule. If the road is wet or slippery you will
need additional space.
3. 	Let other drivers know what you are going to do before you do it. Never slow down
or change lanes suddenly. Frequent lane changes are unsafe.
4. 	Before changing lanes or passing, check your mirrors, signal, and check the blind
spots in the direction in which you intend to move.

-- 51 of 76 --

51
5. 	Never stop in the traffic lane. It is illegal to stop on an interstate unless it is an
emergency. If you must stop for an emergency, move into the breakdown lane and
as far to the right as possible. If you need help, raise the hood of your vehicle, tie a
white cloth on the vehicle, and stay in your vehicle.
6. 	You should drive in the right lane unless you are passing another vehicle or a sign
indicates otherwise.
7. 	Do not drive when tired. Driving when tired is a major cause of crashes on interstates.
If you do become tired, it is important that you stop and rest in a safe area as soon as
possible.
8. 	Icy and snow covered interstates and their ramps can be very dangerous. Remember
to slow down and drive with care. Also, bridges and overpasses may be more
slippery than the main road.
9. 	If you miss your exit ramp, never stop and back up and never use the emergency
turnaround. These crossovers are for emergency and maintenance vehicles only. Go
on to the next exit.
10. Never use cruise control in driving conditions such as rain, fog, snow, ice, etc.
11. When you are approaching any law enforcement, emergency, or repair vehicle with
a flashing light on the side of the road, slow down. The law says you must proceed
with caution and make a lane change away from the emergency vehicle as soon as it
is safe to do so. If you are unable to change lanes you must slow down to 20 mph
below the speed limit in order to go by the stopped vehicles.
What does it indicate if, while driving on a divided highway, the edge of the highway to
your right is painted yellow? You are going the WRONG WAY on a divided highway or
Interstate. On a divided highway the line to your right should be white.
PASSING
When approaching another vehicle or bicycle from the rear and you want to pass, be
sure you have enough distance to pass safely. Signal left to let other drivers know that
you will be pulling out, look to the rear to see if your vehicle is being passed (look in the
rearview mirrors and over your left shoulder to check the blind spot), change lanes and
pass on the left. At night it might be necessary to blink your headlights from low to high
to low beam to warn the driver in front of you that you intend to pass.
If you are passing while towing a trailer, be especially careful that you are well past
the motor vehicle or bicycle you are passing before pulling back into their lane of travel.

-- 52 of 76 --

52
When towing a wide load or driving a motor vehicle that is wider than usual, be especially
careful if you pass any other motorist or bicyclist.
Pass vehicles and bicycles on the left. 	Leave at least four feet of clearance between
your vehicle and any vehicle or bicycle you are passing. You should go far enough
beyond the motor vehicle or bicycle you are passing so that you are able to see the entire
front of the motor vehicle or the bicyclist in your inside rearview mirror. Use your right
signal, check the right blind spot over your shoulder, and return to the right side of the
road. 	When you are being passed by another vehicle, you should slow a little and keep
right. This will allow the other driver to pass more safely.
A driver may pass on the right of another vehicle on a multilane road. On roads that
are not multilane, a driver may pass on the right of a vehicle or bicycle turning or
preparing to turn left, if there is room to go by safely. Under no conditions can a motor
vehicle be passed by driving off the pavement or main traveled part of the road.
DO NOT PASS AT THESE LOCATIONS
 	Hills
 	Curves
 	Railroads
 	Intersections
 	If you see a “changed path ahead”
IMPAIRED DRIVING
While most drivers think only of alcohol when they hear the word impaired, drinking
is not the only way a driver can be impaired. Drugs, even prescription and over the
counter drugs, can seriously affect your ability to drive safely. Driving while drowsy can
also affect your ability to drive and can be very dangerous.
Alcohol and other drugs
The drinking driver is the number one cause of fatal traffic crashes. On average
someone is killed by a drunk driver every 40 minutes.
It is against the law to drive while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.
Drivers who have been drinking or using other drugs do not have good control over
themselves or the vehicle and they are a danger to their own lives and the lives of others.
Vermont law states that when a person's blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is .08 or
above, he/she is “under the influence” or “impaired”. It is important to remember that a
person is impaired at blood alcohol concentration levels below .08. 	Even one drink
impairs your judgment.
People under the age of 21 who operate a vehicle with an alcohol concentration of
.02 or more can receive a civil traffic violation. The Driver’s License will be suspended
and the driver must complete an alcohol and driving education program at their own
expense.

-- 53 of 76 --

53
What Does Alcohol Do To Your Driving Skills?
Alcohol is a drug; it can and will affect your driving. When alcohol has been
consumed, the decisions that you make may very well be faulty. Alcohol may appear to
give you a lift; it does not. It does affect your thought process. Alcohol, in fact, is a
depressant; it will affect you in the following ways:
 	Judgment- You may no longer be able to make good decisions about driving. You
may think you are fine, but you are not aware of the risks you may be taking.
 	Vision - Your overall vision may be greatly reduced.
 	Concentration - Your mind wanders, and you can't concentrate.
 	Understanding - Your comprehension level about what is happening around you will
suffer. You may not realize what you are doing.
 	Feelings (Senses) - Your feelings are suppressed; you don't feel speed so you won't
realize that you could be speeding.
 	Reaction time - It will take you longer to react and move your foot from the gas pedal
to the brake. This slowed-down reaction time can be the difference between arriving
safely or not arriving at all.
Time is the only way to reduce the effects of alcohol. Drinking coffee, taking a cold
shower or running around will not sober a person up. It takes at least an hour per drink
for the alcohol and its effects to be processed out of your body. This means you may
have to wait several hours to reduce the effects of alcohol to enable you to drive safely.
Other Drugs
Driving after taking other drugs or narcotics (even from prescription and over the
counter) can be just as deadly as alcohol, even more so for some persons. Drugs may
cause you to become sleepy and keep you from thinking or acting properly. Feeling this
way while driving a vehicle sets you up for death on the highway. Again, time is the only
way to reduce the effects of any drug.
If you are convicted of DUI or driving after taking drugs, your license will be
suspended. You must pay a large fine, lawyer fees, pay for an alcohol education class,
you may go to jail and your insurance will increase.
Vermont has an "Implied Consent" Law - This means that when a person gets a
license, that person is agreeing to say "yes" when asked to take a test to see how much
alcohol or other drugs are in the person's body. A police officer may ask a driver to take
the test if the officer thinks the driver is impaired by alcohol or other drugs. If the driver
refuses, they will lose their Driver's License for at least six (6) months.
NOTE: Vermont has an administrative suspension process, which means that you can
lose your license through a civil process before a criminal DUI conviction.
THINK BEFORE YOU DRINK!
If you are going to drink, make plans before you start
 	Use a designated driver and make sure that driver doesn't drink. A designated driver
agrees not to drink or use other drugs, and is responsible for getting the others home
safely.
 	Call a parent, or other responsible person to arrange a safe ride home.

-- 54 of 76 --

54
 	Arrange to stay overnight where you are, if it is safe to do so.
 	Listen to your friends. If they warn you about not driving, take their concern seriously.
 	Before you begin drinking, give your vehicle keys to a friend who does not drink, and
who will not let you drive after drinking.
Time is the only way to reduce the effects of alcohol. It takes at least an hour per
drink for the alcohol and its effects to be processed out of your body. This
means you may have to wait several hours to reduce the affects of alcohol to
enable you to drive safely. Drinking coffee, taking a shower, exercising, etc.,
cannot reduce your BAC or the effects of alcohol.
The Vermont Emergency Nurses Association (ENCARE) sponsors the
installation of signs at the site of alcohol related fatal crashes. When you see one of these
signs, it means someone died at that location because of a drunk driver.
If you are concerned by your drinking, contact VT Helplink. VT Helplink is a free
and confidential alcohol and drug support and referral service provided by the Vermont
Department of Health. A caring, trained specialist will help you or your loved one take a
step toward recovery.
Visit VTHelplink.org or call 802-565-LINK (or toll-free 833-565-LINK)
Drowsy Driving
Each year, many crashes occur because the driver falls asleep at the wheel. This may
result in a head on crash with another vehicle, a tree or other roadside object. 	Drowsy
drivers can drive so poorly they may appear to be drunk.
Some signs of drowsy driving are:
 	Having problems focusing or keeping your eyes open
 	Yawning repeatedly
 	Not remembering the last few miles you drove
 	Drifting out of the travel lane
 	Missing traffic signs
People most at risk of drowsy driving are those who drive after not having enough
sleep. Often this includes young people, shift workers and people who work very long
hours. It also includes people who may or may not realize they have a sleep disorder.
Drivers may know they are tired but believe they can stay awake. Unfortunately, instead
of staying awake they may fall asleep and crash.
Avoid driving when drowsy. If you become drowsy while you’re on the road, find a
safe place to pull over and stop. Opening your window and turning up your radio will not
keep you awake. In fact, when you start trying to find a way to stay awake, that should
be a sure sign you need to stop and rest.
DISTRACTED DRIVING
Studies show that anything that takes away your attention from driving could result
in a crash.
No matter what the distraction, drivers who are distracted exhibit the same basic type
of behavior. Distractions cause drivers to react more slowly to traffic conditions or
events, such as a vehicle stopping to make a left turn or pulling out from a side road.

-- 55 of 76 --

55
Distracted drivers fail more often to recognize potential hazards such as pedestrians,
bicyclists or debris in the road. Distracted Drivers also decrease their “margin of safety”,
leading them to take risks they might not otherwise take, such as turning left in front of
oncoming traffic. Inattention and failure to yield are the most common driver contributing
actions in pedestrian and bicycle motor vehicle crashes in Vermont.
Dealing with Distractions
 	Pre-program your favorite radio stations for easy access and keep your stereo at a
volume low enough so you can hear things outside of your vehicle, such as a siren,
horn honking, or a train whistle.
 	Designate a front-seat passenger to serve as a “co-pilot,” rather than fumble with
maps or navigation systems. If you are driving alone, map out destinations in advance.
 	Avoid eating and drinking while driving. Make sure all food items are secure and
drinks fit securely in cup holders.
 	Do not underestimate how distracting children can be in the vehicle. Teach them the
importance of good behavior while in a vehicle.
 	Take a break if you find yourself “lost in thought” while driving.
 	Remember to focus on driving and avoid being distracted by people or objects inside
and outside your vehicle.
 	Do your personal grooming at home, not in the vehicle.
 	Pets can be distracting and should be in a carrier, not in your lap or free to move.
 	Smoking is a distraction. Avoid smoking while driving.
Dealing with Emotions
Emotions affect safe driving. You may not be able to drive well if you are overly
worried, excited, afraid, angry or depressed.
Give yourself time to cool off and calm down. Taking a walk is a good way to do this.
Plan ahead. Give yourself some extra time for your driving trip. Leave a few minutes
early. If you have plenty of time, you are less likely to speed or break laws or crash.
Cell Phones and other Electronic Devices
• 	It is against the law for drivers to read or send messages while driving.
• 	It is against the law for drivers to use a portable electronic device while operating a
motor vehicle on a public highway in Vermont, including while the vehicle is
stationary
• 	A person who violates this law shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and
not more than $200.00 for a first violation, and of not less than $250.00 and not more
than $500.00 for a second or subsequent violation.
• 	A person convicted of violating this section while operating within a properly
designated work zone in which construction, maintenance, or utility personnel are
present shall have two points assessed against his or her driving record for a first
conviction and five points assessed for a second or subsequent conviction.
• 	Recognize that driving requires your full attention.
• 	If a call needs to be made, ask a passenger in the vehicle to place the call for you or
stop at a safe place before making your call.

-- 56 of 76 --

56
• 	Don’t answer your cell phone. Let the caller leave a message, and return calls when
stopped at a safe location.
• 	Secure your phone in the vehicle so that it does not become a projectile in a crash.
THE ROAD (SKILLS) TEST
When you take the licensing road test the examiner will watch to see if you can drive
a motor vehicle safely, courteously and correctly. 	You must also demonstrate you
understand and can follow the rules of the road.
Stopping and Starting On a Hill
When you take your road test, the examiner will have you stop and start on a hill. You
will be instructed to drive to the right side of the road, stop, and then set your
parking/emergency brake and shift to neutral. Be sure to signal right to tell others what
you are doing. The parking/emergency brake must hold the vehicle from rolling back.
Before driving up the hill, put the vehicle in gear. Signal left. Check your mirrors and
left blind spot to be sure that traffic is clear. Accelerate gently until you feel the vehicle
want to move and then release the parking brake if your vehicle’s parking brake is not
designed to automatically disengage and look over your left shoulder once again before
driving out. You should be able to drive up the hill without rolling back.
Some vehicles have a hill assist function, and some parking brakes will automatically
disengage when you apply the accelerator. Perform the hill start the way your vehicle is
meant to.
NOTE: You may need to stop on a hill for a stop sign, traffic light, or an emergency such
as a dog running into the street. To prevent a rollback when starting on a hill, a driver can
use any of these following techniques:
• 	Quickly move your foot from the brake to the gas.
• 	Set your parking/emergency brake. Move your right foot to the gas. Apply the gas
lightly and carefully release the parking/emergency brake to continue up the hill.
NOTE: When driving downhill, you should not coast with the clutch to the floor or the
gearshift in neutral.
Turning Around
When you take your driving test, you will be required to demonstrate the following
procedure for turning around, using a side street.
1. 	As you approach the side street on your right as instructed by the examiner, reduce
speed and check for traffic in all directions. Turn on your directional light so other
drivers will know what you are doing.
Drive just past the street and stop about
18 inches from the curb or edge of the
road. Shift into reverse. Check for traffic
in all directions before backing. Be sure
to check your blind spots.
2. 	When the side street is clear, back slowly into it. Be careful to keep on your own
side of the street. Look mostly through the rear window while backing. Stop backing

-- 57 of 76 --

57
when your vehicle is all the way into the side street beyond any crosswalks or stop
lines.
3. 	Before you turn back out on to the street, signal left and shift to drive. When there
are no vehicles coming, make a proper left turn to complete the turnaround.
Always look in back of you and back the vehicle slowly. Never back across an
intersection. Remember, when you are backing your vehicle you are responsible for
traffic in all directions!
Note: There are several other options for turning your vehicle around. The choice you
make depends on traffic conditions and whether or not it is legal. Going around the block
or using a parking lot is the safest option.
Parallel Parking
You will also be required to parallel park during your road test.
Entering the Parking Space
When approaching the parking space, check your rearview mirror and signal right.
Stop alongside the front vehicle, two to three feet away. Shift to reverse. Check for
traffic and pedestrians in all directions before backing. Look over your left shoulder to
check the blind spot.
Using the pictures below as a guide, maneuver your vehicle into the space. There are
several methods to accomplish this. All methods require steering fully right to fully left
and looking through the rear window while backing slowly. Slowly pull forward to center
vehicle in space.
Leaving the Parking Space
If necessary, back up the vehicle to a position from which re-entry into the traffic lane
can be made in one motion. Signal left, look all around for any vehicles, bicyclists and
pedestrians (check the rearview and side view mirrors, and look over your left shoulder

-- 58 of 76 --

58
into the blind spot). When clear, drive out carefully. Enter the roadway slowly, being
careful to stay on your own side.
Note: On the road test, you may be required to parallel park with only a front vehicle
available. Be sure to still follow the same procedures.
CRASHES
Poor decisions made by drivers cause most crashes. Some examples are:
1. 	Driving too fast for road conditions.
2. 	Not paying attention to their driving.
3. 	Driving too close to the motor vehicle in front of them.
4. 	Driving over the center line.
5. 	Not yielding the right-of-way.
6. 	Driving after drinking or using other drugs.
7. 	Passing when unsafe to do so.
8. 	Not checking mirrors and blind spots.
What to Do After a Crash
A driver who has been involved in a crash is required by law to stop and give any
assistance that is reasonably necessary. 	Often those involved in crash scenes are
confused and upset, so be prepared for crash situations. It is helpful to review the steps
which should be taken at a crash scene.
1. 	If possible, move the involved vehicles out of the traveled lanes and onto the
shoulder. This will reduce the chance of someone else crashing into the involved
vehicles, causing additional damage and injury.
2. 	If someone is injured, call 911. Leave the injured person where they are. You may
injure the person more by moving that person the wrong way. Keep the person warm
and calm.
3. 	A police officer will respond to a 911 call and will view the crash scene. The police
officer can obtain the facts about what
happened. The police will not take sides for
one driver or the other. You will have to show
your license, proof of valid registration and
insurance to the police officer. You must also
show your license to anyone who is injured or whose property has been damaged.
4. 	If you hit a parked vehicle and cause damage, and you can't find the owner, you must
write your name, address and phone number and leave it in, or on the vehicle. This
will allow the owner to know whom to contact.
5. 	If any person has been injured, or if the damage is over $3,000, you must make a
written report to the Department of Motor Vehicles within 72 hours. Crash reports
help the state improve roadways.
Crash Reports
You can get a Vermont Crash Report at any Vermont Police Department or by
contacting the Department of Motor Vehicles, 120 State Street, Montpelier, VT 05603,
by phone at 802.828.2000, on line or at a DMV office. These are some things you should
note carefully if you have a crash.

-- 59 of 76 --

59
1. 	Exactly where it happened.
2. 	In a city, note the names of the streets if the crash was at an intersection, or the
number of the nearest house to the crash.
3. 	Outside cities, locations are more difficult to identify but are just as important.
4. 	Find out the name of the nearest town, the route number or the name of the road you
are on, and the name of, and how far it is to, the nearest crossroad. Note how far it is
from something such as a telephone pole (if it has a number), end of bridge, farm
house, railroad crossing or nearest number of the Interstate.
5. 	Mile markers can be used to pinpoint the exact location of a crash scene. Use this
information to help the police when reporting a crash.
6. 	Time of crash.
7. 	Explain what damage occurred.
8. 	Explain what injuries were sustained in the crash.
9. 	Get the name, address, license and registration numbers of the other driver. It is also
good to get the names and addresses of the persons in the other motor vehicle and
all persons who saw the crash.
If you have a crash with another vehicle, the other driver has the right to see your
license, registration and insurance information.
Note: If a Vermont driver has a crash in another state, it must be reported in the
state where the crash happened.
YOU MUST TAKE PROPER CARE OF YOUR VEHICLES
Inspection
Your vehicle must be inspected once a year. Inspection makes sure that your vehicle
is checked at least once a year, but you must keep it running properly at all times. If your
vehicle is not running properly, you may be found at fault in case of a crash.
The inspection sticker indicates when you have to get the next inspection. All motor
vehicles have to be inspected within 15 days of registration, unless bearing a valid
Vermont inspection sticker.
The following equipment should be safe, in good working order, and
properly adjusted:
Brakes
After a time brakes become worn out and must have new linings. Oil or grease may
leak into the brakes and make them grab. Water may get into them from driving in wet
weather so they will not properly stop the vehicle. Dirt from dusty roads may work in
and wear them out. Using the brakes often on a long trip in hilly country will cause them
to overheat, and then they will not work properly. Brakes must be checked at regular
intervals.
The most common cause of bad brakes is that they do not operate together properly.
When applying the brakes suddenly, one takes hold before the other and causes your
vehicle to swerve. You can check this yourself by noting whether the vehicle swerves
when traveling at a slow speed on a road with no other vehicles in sight and you are
holding the steering wheel lightly.

-- 60 of 76 --

60
Be sure to see that there is plenty of fluid in the brake system. If you notice that the
brake pedal goes down too far, have the brake fluid checked at once as there may be a
leak in the system.
Tires
Tires must have at least 2/32" of tread depth. It is not safe or legal to use tires after
the tread is worn off or worn down to the wear bars on the tire.
Hold a penny with Abraham Lincoln's body between your thumb and forefinger.
Place Lincoln's head first into the deepest looking groove. Can you see all of his
head? If yes, your tires are too worn-don't drive on them, and make sure to get
them replaced.
Be sure to keep the right amount of air in your tires. 	Both overinflated and
underinflated tires reduce traction, cause quicker tire wear, and affect steering. If your
vehicle pulls to one side or steers hard look at your tires and have your wheels checked.
Wavy marks on your front tires may mean that the wheels are out of alignment. The safe
thing to do is to have all good tires with the proper amount of tread.
Steering
If it becomes difficult to steer your vehicle, or your steering wheel moves too loosely,
you should have it checked by a qualified mechanic. A good rule is to get your steering
and what mechanics call "the front end" looked over two times a year.
Lights
Your headlights must be kept working properly. Headlights working properly and
used properly show that the driver is thinking of the safety of other drivers. If your
headlights are dim, aimed too low, or dirty, you will not be able to see as far ahead as
you should. If the lights are aimed too high or do not go to low beam when a vehicle
comes toward you, your headlights may blind the other driver.
Tail lights, stop lights, directional lights, and parking lights should always be working
properly. The back license plate must be lighted so it can be seen and read at least 50 feet
from the back of the vehicle. When bulbs burn out, they should be replaced right away
with the manufacturer’s recommended replacements.
Windshield Wipers
You must have windshield wipers which work properly. Keep your windshield clean,
as it improves your vision both for day and nighttime driving.
Windows and Defrosters
All defrosters—front and rear—must be in good working order. Do not try to drive
any vehicle unless the window interiors are free of moisture and outside windows are
clear of ice and snow. Also keep interiors of all windows clean.
Exhaust System
The exhaust system must not leak. Leaking exhausts have often caused carbon
monoxide poisoning or death by allowing carbon monoxide gas to enter the passenger
area of the vehicle. You cannot smell carbon monoxide gas. If you become drowsy or
nauseous, it could indicate carbon monoxide poisoning.

-- 61 of 76 --

61
Speedometer and Odometer
The speedometer and odometer in your vehicle must be working properly and must
be where the driver can see them. Federal law states that the numbers on an odometer
must not be altered and an odometer statement must be signed by the seller and purchaser
when the vehicle is sold.
Other Things to Keep In Mind
A driver has to be able to see clearly to the front and sides of the vehicle, so nothing
should be in the way. Objects carried in the vehicle, passengers, or pets should not be in
the driver's way while driving. You must have a rearview mirror and a horn. The law
states there shall not be anything hanging from the rearview mirror or sun visors.
Emission Control System
Motor vehicles are a major source of air pollution in Vermont. Collectively they
account for over 50% of the air pollution generated in Vermont. Although new vehicles
are much cleaner (provided they are maintained properly) than older models, they still
release large amounts of pollutants into our air. To make sure that your vehicle’s emission
control system is functioning properly, it is checked as part of the annual inspection
procedure.
As part of the annual inspection the catalytic converter is inspected to make sure it is
present on your vehicle. If your vehicle is supposed to have a catalytic converter and it is
not present or if the catalytic converter fails, it must be replaced. It is against federal and
state law to disconnect your vehicles catalytic converter or to have a mechanic disconnect
or tamper with it.
Another way that vehicles cause air pollution is through the evaporation of gas.
During the annual inspection your vehicle’s gas cap will be examined to make sure it is
in good condition.
The On Board Diagnostic computer system (OBD) will be checked to make sure the
vehicle’s emissions control system is working properly. Specific problem areas can be
pinpointed through a properly functioning “OBD”.
To find out more about vehicle emissions and what you can do to help keep
Vermont’s air as clean as possible, visit the Agency of Natural Resources web site.
Questions about the annual inspection program can be directed to the
Department of Motor Vehicles at (802) 828-2094.

-- 62 of 76 --

62
Safety Belts
The law requires all occupants of a motor vehicle to be restrained with a safety belt,
or a federally approved child passenger restraining system.
Wearing Your Safety Belt
When wearing a safety belt (or seat belt), you are less likely to be injured or killed in
a collision. Safety belts make it easier to sit in a safe, comfortable position for better
control of the vehicle; safety belts hold you in the position motor vehicle makers intended
you to be.
Safety belts are most effective when used properly. Lap belts should fit snugly across
the hips, not over the stomach. Shoulder belts go over the shoulder and across the center
of the chest. Seatbelt extensions are available from the vehicle manufacturer. Never tuck
a shoulder belt under your arm or behind your back. Safety belts are designed to cross
your body at its strongest points in order to keep you safe in a motor vehicle crash. Safety
belts keep you inside the vehicle, in one position, rather than being thrown out of the
vehicle where the instances of death and serious injury are much greater. The use of
safety belts keeps occupants in one position within the vehicle where the chances of
injury from other occupants are also limited in a crash.
Protect Your Child – It’s the Law!
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for children aged 3 to 14. Parents
and caregivers are urged to make sure their car seats and booster seats
are properly installed in their vehicles to prevent injuries and deaths
among their children.
Too often, parents are confused about how to install their child’s
seat correctly, don’t know that every seat doesn’t fit in every car, or
don’t realize that their vehicle is equipped with the Lower Anchors
and Tethers for Children (LATCH) system.
Visit Be Seat Smart for more information on choosing a proper
seat or to find a Free Child Safety Seat Inspection site near you.
Child Restraint Systems 23 V.S.A. § 1258
• 	A child under two years of age must be properly secured in a federally approved
rear-facing child car seat with a harness.
• 	A child in a rear-facing car seat must not ride in front of an active airbag.
• 	A child over 2 but under five years of age must be properly secured in a federally
approved rear-facing or forward-facing car seat with a harness.

-- 63 of 76 --

63
• 	A child under eight years of age who is not properly secured in a harnessed car seat
must be properly secured in a booster seat.
• 	A child under 13 years of age must, if practical, ride in the back seat.
• 	A child under 18 years of age who is not properly secured in a harnessed car seat or
booster seat must be wearing a seat belt.
NOTE: Never place a child’s safety seat in front of an air bag!

-- 64 of 76 --

64
Chapter 8 - Point System
The Vermont Point System
Points are put on your driving record each time you are found guilty of breaking a
motor vehicle law. For example you are given points for the following offenses:
1. 	Speeding, 2 - 8 points depending on your speed over the speed limit.
2. 	Texting while driving, 2 - 5 points.
3. 	Driving without a license, 2 points.
4. 	Failure to stop for a stop sign or red light, 2 points.
5. 	Failure to obey a police officer, 4 points.
6. 	Failure to yield the right of way to an ambulance, fire truck, police officer, 5
points.
7. 	Failure to yield the right of way to a pedestrian in a crosswalk, 4 points.
8. 	Failure to stop for a school bus that has stopped with the red warning lights
flashing, 5 points.
When a driver receives a total of 10 points, a letter will be sent notifying the driver
that their privilege to drive is to be suspended. A hearing may be requested to verify the
convictions and the number of points accrued. The number of points received within 2
years will determine how long your driving privilege will be suspended. The more points
received - the longer the period of suspension. Points are not assessed for parking or
defective equipment violations.

-- 65 of 76 --

65
Chapter 9 – Vehicle Ownership
HOW TO REGISTER YOUR VEHICLE
This is basic information on vehicle registration. For detailed information please call
802.828.2000 or visit us online at dmv.vermont.gov. If you live in Vermont and have a
vehicle that you want to drive on the roads, you must register it. If you are moving to
Vermont from another state, you must register your vehicle within 60 days of moving
into the state.
Registration and Plates
Proof of valid registration must always be in the vehicle when it is being used. A
police officer has the right to see it. The registration plates must be properly affixed so
that they will not become loose. No portion of the registration plates should be covered
or hidden from view, and they must be kept clean at all times. The rear plate must be
lighted so that it can be read from at least 50 feet away. The number plates you get must
only be used for that vehicle. You may transfer them to a new vehicle that you buy if you
trade in or sell your old vehicle.
Selling your vehicle to someone else:
1. 	Give the new owner a bill of sale that includes the purchaser(s) name, seller(s)
signature, date of sale, and the year, make, serial number and amount of money you
were paid for the vehicle.
2. 	Sign the back of the title showing the new owner's name and address. Also fill in the
mileage of the vehicle and the date of sale.
3. 	An odometer statement is required to be signed by both seller and buyer on all sales
of vehicles model year 2011 or newer. This statement is included on your vehicle
title and/or the Vermont Bill of Sale.
4. 	Remove your registration plates from the vehicle.
Trading your vehicle:
1. 	Give the new owner a bill of sale that includes the purchaser(s) name, seller(s)
signature, date of sale, and the year, make, serial number and amount you were paid
or allowed for a trade in on your old vehicle.
2. 	Have the person you are trading with give you a bill of sale for the vehicle you are
getting. This should have the information about the vehicle you traded for. Have the
title to the vehicle properly signed over to you.
3. 	Remove your registration plates from the old vehicle. If you want to transfer your
registration, put the plates on the vehicle you just purchased.
4. 	Fill out an Application for Registration, Tax and Title, include the title for the vehicle
you just bought. Mail these forms with a check or money order for the correct fees
to the Department of Motor Vehicles in Montpelier within 24 hours.
Lost Registration or Registration Plates
If you lose your registration certificate you can get a replacement from the
Department of Motor Vehicles at any of our offices, by mail or online at
dmv.vermont.gov.

-- 66 of 76 --

66
If you lose one or both of your registration plates, pick up a Replacement Plate
Application from any Department of Motor Vehicles office, a police station, or online at
dmv.vermont.gov.
Name/Address/Vehicle Changes
If you change your name, your address or the color of your vehicle, you are required
to notify the Department of Motor Vehicles within 30 days.
Purchase and Use Tax
Non-Leased Vehicles
When you buy a new or used vehicle, you have to pay a tax. This is called a Purchase
and Use Tax and is 6% of the price you paid for the non-leased vehicle or the current fair
market value, whichever is greater.
New residents of Vermont applying for registration for the first time on a motor
vehicle acquired outside the State of Vermont on which a sales or use tax has been paid
by the person applying for registration in Vermont, or their spouse, will be exempt from
the Vermont Purchase and Use Tax upon providing proof that the tax paid in another
jurisdiction is equal to or greater than the Vermont tax or if the vehicle has been registered
in a jurisdiction which collects Purchase or Use tax for at least 3 years. If the tax paid in
another jurisdiction is less than the Vermont tax, the tax due shall be the difference.
Leased Vehicles
All applications for registration, tax, and/or title of a leased vehicle from a Vermont
vehicle dealer or a Vermont vehicle dealer acting on behalf of the lessor, must be
accompanied by a Purchase and Use Tax Computation - Leased Vehicle form (VD-147)
or a copy of the lease agreement and/or a dealer worksheet. If the appropriate material is
not received, the leased vehicle will be taxed at 6% of the acquisition cost.
The taxable cost of a leased vehicle will be calculated at 6% of the acquisition cost of
the vehicle, minus the lease end value, as stated on the Purchase and Use Tax
Computation - Leased Vehicle form (VD-147) or as stated in the lease agreement and/or
dealer worksheet, without regard to whether or not you have the option to purchase the
vehicle at the end of the lease.
Motor Vehicle Title Information
All vehicles must have a Vermont Motor vehicle title. Some exceptions are: a
motorcycle with less than 300 cc's of engine displacement and a trailer with empty weight
of 1,500 pounds or less.
A Manufacturer's Certificate of Origin is required for all new vehicles. You cannot
register a vehicle without this.
All vehicles that are being registered in Vermont must have an application for
registration. You will also need the bill of sale and the former owner's title signed over
to you.

-- 67 of 76 --

67
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN)
The 	Vehicle 	Identification 	Number 	(VIN) 	is 	the 	identifying 	code 	for
a specific automobile. A VIN comprises 17 characters (digits and capital letters) that act
as a unique identifier for the vehicle. A VIN displays the car's unique features,
specifications, and manufacturer. Before 1981, VINs varied in length from 11 to 17
characters.
When Verification is Required
• 	Vehicles with Salvage Documentation.
• 	Vehicles that are being titled under bond.
• 	Vehicles with registrations from any foreign country, including Canada.
VIN Verifications must be completed in Vermont. VIN verifications are to be
completed by a Vermont law enforcement officer, personnel employed by a law
enforcement unit who, for this purpose, are under the direct supervision of a law
enforcement officer, or DMV employees designated by the Vermont Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles.
Rebuilt Vehicles
Any vehicle being registered in Vermont that has a SALVAGE title will be issued a
title which will have the words REBUILT VEHICLE. When you apply to register a
SALVAGE vehicle you must have the identification number of the vehicle checked by
a Motor Vehicle employee or Vermont law enforcement person and have the VIN
verification section of the application completed.
Liens
If you borrow money to buy a vehicle from a bank, credit union, or another person,
the vehicle is said to have a "lien" on it. The person or bank you borrow money from is
called a "lien holder." The lien holder's name must be on the registration application. The
title to your vehicle, when issued, will be sent to the lien holder and will not be given to
you until you pay back the money you borrowed.
Insurance
Vermont has a law called "Maintenance of Financial Responsibility." This means that
the vehicle you drive MUST be covered by liability insurance.
Liability and property damage are the most important type of automobile insurance
you should have. It protects you against financial loss when bodily injury or property
damage occurs.
The amount of coverage MUST be at least $25,000 for death or injury of one person;
$50,000 for death or injury of 2 or more persons; $10,000 for property damage. You must
carry a card from your insurance company in the vehicle that shows there is insurance
coverage on the vehicle. If you are stopped by a police officer you will have to show the
card. If you are going to take a driving test you will also have to show the card.
If a police officer stops you and asks to see proof of your insurance and you do not
have insurance, the officer will give you a ticket. You will be fined and assessed two
points on your driving record.
If you have insurance on your vehicle and a police officer stops you, and you cannot
show the card to the officer, you have 15 days to do so. The card you show the officer
must say that you had insurance at the time the officer stopped you.

-- 68 of 76 --

68
If you are driving without insurance and any of the following happen, your license
will be taken away by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles until you get insurance. You
will have to prove to the Commissioner that you have insurance for a full 3 years.
 You are in a crash, even if it isn’t your fault,
 Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs,
 Driving or taking another person's vehicle without the owner's consent,
 Driving when your license is suspended, revoked, or refused,
 Driving a vehicle in such a way as to cause the death of another person,
 Leaving the scene of a crash
Inspection (see page 62 for more detail)
Your vehicle must be inspected once a year. Inspection makes sure that your vehicle
is checked at least once a year, but you must keep it running properly at all times. If your
vehicle is not running properly, you may be found at fault in case of a crash.
The inspection sticker indicates when you have to get the next inspection. All motor
vehicles have to be inspected within 15 days of registration, unless bearing a valid
Vermont inspection sticker.
Drive Smart and Save - “Green Driving” Tips
Here are 10 efficient driving tips that will save you money on gas, reduce your carbon
footprint, and conserve energy!
SLOW DOWN AND WATCH SPEED - On the interstate, drive 55 or 60 miles per
hour instead of 65 to save fuel. EPA estimates up to a 15 percent improvement in
fuel economy by following this tip alone.
ACCELERATE AND BRAKE SMOOTHLY - Accelerating smoothly from a stop and
braking softly conserves fuel. Fast starts, weaving in and out of traffic and hard braking
wastes fuel and wears out some of the car components, such as brakes and tires, more
quickly. Maximize your vehicle's momentum by maintaining a safe distance between
vehicles and anticipating traffic conditions to allow for more time to brake and accelerate
gradually.
AVOID EXCESSIVE IDLING WHEN PARKED - Idling wastes fuel, causes engine
wear, and can cause respiratory illnesses. In winter weather, remove snow and ice from
windows before starting the engine. Safety first: if defrosting is not adequate, increase
warm-up time as needed. Limit stationary warm ups to 30 seconds when possible.
Driving slowly to moderately is the most efficient way to warm up. If you're parked in
town, idling for more than 10 seconds uses more fuel than shutting off and restarting.
Allowing a vehicle to idle while unattended in public is in violation of Vermont's
unattended motor vehicle law; if you leave your vehicle, you must shut it off.
CHECK YOUR TIRES - Keep tires properly inflated to the recommended tire pressure
(which can be found on the placard in the driver's side door jam of the vehicle and in the
vehicle owner's manual). This alone can reduce the average amount of fuel use by 3-4

-- 69 of 76 --

69
percent. Under-inflated tires increase rolling resistance and reduce fuel economy. They
also wear more rapidly.
BE KIND TO YOUR VEHICLE - Maintain proper engine tune-up to keep vehicles
running efficiently. Keep the wheels aligned. Wheels that are fighting each other waste
fuel. Replace air filters as recommended. Always consult the Owner's Manual for proper
maintenance.
TRAVEL LIGHT - Unnecessary weight, such as unneeded items in the trunk and a lot
of luggage on the roof rack, makes the engine work harder and consumes more fuel.
MINIMIZE USE OF HEAT AND AIR CONDITIONING - Use heating and air
conditioning selectively to reduce the load on the engine. Decreasing your usage of the
air conditioner when temperatures are above 80 degrees can help you save 10-15 percent
of fuel. Use the vent setting as much as possible. Park in the shade to keep the car cool
and reduce the need for air conditioning.
CLOSE WINDOWS AT HIGH SPEEDS - Don't drive with the windows open unless
your keep your speed under 50 mph. Driving with the windows open at highway speeds
increases aerodynamic drag on the vehicle and lowers fuel economy.
CONSOLIDATE TRIPS - Plan ahead to consolidate your trips, saving many miles of
traveling. Planning ahead will also enable you to bypass congested routes, leading to less
idling.
CAR POOL - Share your ride to work, shopping and recreation. It not only saves
gasoline, it can be more fun than riding alone.

-- 70 of 76 --

70
Chapter 10 – Commercial License
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE
A Commercial Driver’s License is required for operators of vehicles rated in excess
of 26,000 pounds or transporting 16 or more passengers (including the driver) or
hazardous materials. There are three classes of Commercial Driver’s License:
 	Class A - Any combination of vehicles with GCWR of 26,001 pounds or more,
providing the towed unit has GVWR of 10,001 pounds or more.
 	Class B - Single vehicles with GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more, providing any
towed vehicle has GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.
 	Class C - Single vehicles with GVWR of 26,000 pounds or less, transporting
placarded hazardous materials or designed to carry 16 or more passengers
including the driver. These vehicles may tow a vehicle with GVWR of 10,000
pounds or less.
 	Commercial Driver Instructional (Learner’s) Permit - allows a person to
receive 	commercial 	driving instruction 	and 	behind 	the 	wheel 	driving
experience on public highways.
In accordance with state and federal law, any person holding a Commercial License
from another state must transfer their Commercial Driver’s License within 30 days of
establishing residency in Vermont.
For further information about Commercial Driver’s Licenses and instructional
permits call 802.828.2000.
To schedule a written examination visit mydmv.vermont.gov. To schedule a CDL
skill test, you must first submit a scheduling fee to: CDL Unit, Department of Motor
Vehicles, 120 State St., Montpelier, VT 05603-0001. Once the fee is received, you may
schedule the skill test.
Vermont Commercial Driver’s License Manuals are available at all Department of
Motor Vehicle Offices.

-- 71 of 76 --

71
Chapter 11 - Persons with Disabilities
The Department of Motor Vehicles knows how important it is for you to drive. A
person who has a disability may still be able to get a license. The vehicle may need some
special equipment to drive it safely. If a person who has a disability needs special
equipment, it must fit and work properly.
When you take your test, be truthful in explaining your disability to the examiner. If
you need help getting into the building where you take the test, tell the scheduler when
you call to make your appointment.
If you have a medical problem such as epilepsy, diabetes (requiring insulin injection),
or any other condition which may result in a loss of consciousness or have loss of a limb
or are in a wheel chair, you must notify the Department of Motor Vehicles, Driver
Improvement Section at 802.828.2000 prior to making an appointment for an
examination. You will be sent a medical evaluation form that must be completed by your
doctor. When the doctor has completed the form, mail it back to the Department of Motor
Vehicles for review. You will be notified in writing if approval is granted or not granted
for you to be issued a Learner’s Permit. If you are not sure if a medical condition that
you have will affect your ability to obtain a Learner’s Permit, please call the Department
of Motor Vehicles, Driver Improvement Section at 802.828.2000 for advice.
Parking for Disabled Drivers
A person who has trouble walking may park without a fee, for 10 days, in a parking
place where other drivers can only park a set time. (Such persons cannot park in places
where parking or stopping vehicles is not allowed. They may not park in places saved for
certain vehicles, or anywhere that parking is banned.) In order to do this, the person must
have a special registration plate or placard which is issued by the Vermont Department
of Motor Vehicles, or a special registration plate or other device which has been issued
by another state for the purpose of parking for the disabled. A disabled person can get a
set of Disabled Registration Plates for each vehicle registered in that person's name.
There is no extra fee for these plates if the vehicle is already registered in Vermont. If a
disabled person does not own a vehicle or does not want the Disabled Registration Plates,
that person may get a Disabled Parking Placard. The Disabled Parking Placard is also
available to blind passengers.
A person, who is disabled or an organization that furnishes their Federal ID Number,
may apply for a Disabled Parking Placard. There is no fee for the placard. The form can
be obtained from the Department of Motor Vehicles, State Police offices, or Town Clerk's
offices. You will have to fill out some of the form and your doctor will have to fill out
another part of the form.
The Disabled Plates/Placard of a disabled person may be revoked if the disabled
person allows individuals not disabled to abuse the privileges of their Disabled Parking
Plates/Placard.
A person who parks in a disabled parking spot illegally may be subject to a fine and
towing charges.
In reference to 9 V.S.A. §4110, a motor vehicle operator who has been issued a
Disabled Plate or Parking Placard under the laws of the State of Vermont or of any other
state shall receive full service by every gasoline station displaying the international

-- 72 of 76 --

72
symbol of disability access and, at full-service gasoline stations offering self-service
pumping at a lesser cost, shall receive the lesser rate.
Self-service gasoline stations, when requested by a motor vehicle operator who holds
a Disabled Plate or Parking Placard, shall require an attendant to dispense gasoline at the
self-service cost.
Purchase and Use Tax for Disabled Drivers
One vehicle owned or leased by a disabled person or their parent or guardian that has
special equipment on it when registered by that person may not be subject to the purchase
and use tax. If you meet the following criteria, you may be eligible for exemption from
paying the purchase and use tax:
1. 	You must have a disability which has left you permanently disabled.
2. 	The vehicle controls must be altered so that it enables you to operate the vehicle, or
must have a mechanical lifting device to allow entry and exit from the vehicle.
3. 	Your Driver’s License must be restricted to operation with altered controls, if you
are claiming exemption due to the installation of altered controls.
4. 	You and any titled owners/registrants may have only one active registration
involving a purchase and use tax exemption at a time.
5. 	Form VT-014 signed by a physician.

-- 73 of 76 --

73
Chapter 12 – Parents or Guardians
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death and injury for teenagers. As a parent
or guardian, you have a critical role in influencing your child’s safe driving habits.
1. 	Assure your teen has plenty of chances to practice supervised driving, even more
than the required 40 hours.
2. 	Set a good example as a safe, responsible, and law abiding driver.
3. 	Set and discuss family rules for maintaining driving privileges based on known risk
factors for teen drivers. Such rules could address:
 	Lack of safety belt use
 	Speeding
 	Nighttime driving (after 9pm)
 	Using a cell phone or other
distractions
 	Multiple teen passengers
 	Drowsy driving
 	Impaired driving
4. 	Help your teen understand the risks associated with riding with another teen driver,
particularly those who choose to drive dangerously and/or violate the laws.
5. 	Communicate with your child and other parents to help everyone, both drivers and
passengers, to follow the Junior Driver’s License restrictions. This will help all teens
stay safe and within the GDL law.
6. 	Encourage your teen to speak up for safety when riding with other drivers.
7. 	Choose a safe, reliable, well-maintained vehicle for your teen driver.
(Visit www.iihs.org/ratings for crash ratings of vehicles and other information about
choosing safe vehicles for teens)
NOTE: Both the Learner’s Permit and the Junior Driver’s License are “provisional” and
can be recalled.
• 	As a parent or guardian, you may suspend your child’s provisional license by writing
to the Commissioner of the Department of Motor Vehicles
• 	A recommendation from a Diversion/Reparative Board may result in a 30 day recall
Excerpted from - A PARENT GUIDE TO THE GRADUATED DRIVER’S
LICENSE (GDL)

-- 74 of 76 --

Alcohol, 7, 52, 53
Animals, 19
Anti-Lock, 48, 49
Bicycles, 40, 52
Cell Phone, 47, 56, 73
Child Seat, 62
Commercial Driver License, 12, 17, 70
Current Address, 8, 10
Date Of Birth, 8
Distracted, 54, 55
Driver Education, 12, 13, 14, 15
Driver’s Privilege Card, 11, 12
Drugs, 52, 53, 58, 68
Emergency Vehicle, 31, 51
Emissions Control System, 61
Enhanced Driver's License, 9, 12
Foreign Nationals, 9
Four Seconds, 27, 28, 46
Gender, 11
Hand Signals, 26, 41
Headlights, 19, 25, 42, 45, 46, 49, 51,
60
Highway Markings, 34
Identity, 4, 8, 9
Implied Consent, 53
Interstate, 28, 31, 38, 40, 50, 51, 59
Junior Driver’s License, 7, 12, 13, 14,
15, 20, 21, 23, 73
Learner’s Permit, 2, 3, 7, 12, 13, 15,
16, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 71, 73
Left Turns, 26
Motorcycle, 16, 17, 23, 42, 43, 66
Move Over Law, 31
Nighttime Driving, 13, 20, 73
On Board Diagnostic, 61
Parallel Parking, 29
Parents, 21, 62, 73
Police Vehicle, 31
Proof Of Identity, 16
Provisional, 15, 21, 73
Railroad Crossing, 29, 32, 37, 59
Residency Requirements, 10
Right Of Way, 28, 31, 32, 64
Right Turns, 31
Skidding, 48
Slow Moving Vehicle, 44
Social Security Information, 8, 9
Speed Limits, 34, 38
Stopping, 25, 42, 56
Teen Passengers, 73
Testing, 14
Trains, 33
Turn Signal, 26
U.S. Military, 10
US Citizenship, 9

-- 75 of 76 --

State of Vermont
Agency of Transportation
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
120 State Street
Montpelier, Vermont 05603-0001
dmv.vermont.gov
To:

-- 76 of 76 --